{"CEE": [{"courseTitle": "Sustainable Engineering of Energy, Water, Soil, and Air Resources", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to describe key scientific, economic, and social issues associated with sustainable management of energy, water, soil, and air resources. Students will be able to explain how infrastructure and regulatory systems influence sustainable resource use. Students will be able to identify appropriate technical engineering approaches to address management questions, and to apply basic versions of these techniques to specific problems.", "courseNumber": "1130", "professor": ["Scott Maguffin"], "description": "Course introduces concepts and tools required for the sustainable management of energy, water, soil, and air resources in our modern society.\u00a0 Semester is organized into four modules, each concentrating on one resource area and including a case study of local or regional significance.\u00a0 Students work in teams to address sustainability problems that arise in the case studies.\u00a0 Each module also includes presentations of technical approaches used in environmental engineering analyses. Project teams will be expected to apply those methods in their case study evaluations and management proposals. Technical approaches include life cycle analysis, mass balance computations, and mathematical modeling of pollutant dynamics in the environment.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "AguaClara: Sustainable Water Supply Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Design, build and operate unit processes. Develop measurement and evaluation protocols to measure process performance. Consciousness raising. Develop effective team work habits. Develop ability to give technical presentations.", "courseNumber": "2550", "professor": ["Monroe Weber-Shirk"], "description": "Student teams conduct research, build working models, design full-scale prototypes, create design algorithms, and create educational materials for technology transfer to improve drinking water quality in the Global South. Students in CEE 2550 learn in an apprenticeship role on teams led by students in CEE 4550\u00a0or CEE 5051/CEE 5052. For more information, see aguaclara.cee.cornell.edu.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to CADD", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3080", "professor": ["Steven Curtis"], "description": "Students learn to employ computer-aided design and drafting (CADD) to construct 2D drawings in AutoCAD and 3D rendered models in SketchUp using a variety of AutoCAD and SketchUp techniques.\u00a0 Grades are based on attendance, weekly projects, and a final project due the last week of classes.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Civil and Environmental Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3090", "professor": ["Monroe Weber-Shirk"], "description": "Supervised study by individuals or groups of upper-division students on an undergraduate project or on specialized topics not covered in regular courses.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Engineering Computation", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Be familiar with standard numerical methods and statistical procedures for engineering computation and learn to synthesize from different methods in a specific engineering application. Learn how to compute, estimate and track errors associated with numerical computations. Have a working knowledge of higher-level programming languages widely used in engineering for numerical methods and graphics, in particular, MATLAB. Gain experience in teams. Learn how to develop sanity tests for one's computational results and how to report them in a clear and objective manner.", "courseNumber": "3200", "professor": ["Pete Diamessis"], "description": "Introduction to numerical methods, computational mathematics, and probability and statistics. Development of programming and graphics proficiency with MATLAB and spreadsheets. Topics include Taylor-series approximations, numerical errors, condition numbers, operation counts, convergence, and stability, probability distributions, hypothesis testing. Included are numerical methods for solving engineering problems that entail roots of functions, simultaneous linear equations, statistics, regression, interpolation, numerical differentiation and integration, and solution of ordinary and partial differential equations, including an introduction to finite difference methods. Applications are drawn from different areas of engineering. A group project uses these methods on a realistic engineering problem.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Engineering Economics and Management", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Gain a working knowledge of money management and how to make economic comparisons of alternative engineering designs or projects. Understand the impact of inflation, taxation, depreciation.  Financial planning, economic basis for replacement, project scheduling, and legal and regulatory issues are introduced and applied to economic investment and project-management problems. Appreciation of ethical and other non-economic issues related to professional and personal financial and economic decisions.", "courseNumber": "3230", "professor": ["Ricardo Daziano"], "description": "Introduction to engineering and business economics investment alternatives and to project management. Intended to give students a working knowledge of money management and how to make economic comparisons of alternatives involving future benefits and cost. The impact of inflation, taxation, depreciation, financial planning, economic optimization, project scheduling, and legal and regulatory issues are introduced and applied to economic investment and planning and project-management problems.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Environmental Quality Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students learn how the kinetics and equilibria of chemical and biologically mediated reactions coupled with an understanding of physical transport processes relate to the formulation of models that predict contaminant fate in aquatic systems as well as the effect of contaminants on those systems. Students also learn how the kinetics and equilibria of chemical and biologically mediated reactions coupled with an understanding of physical transport processes result in the formulation of models that allow rational design of wastewater treatment systems.", "courseNumber": "3510", "professor": ["Ruth Richardson"], "description": "Introduction to engineering aspects of environmental quality control. Quality parameters, criteria, and standards for water and wastewater. Elementary analysis pertaining to the modeling of pollutant reactions in natural systems, and introduction to design of unit processes for wastewater treatment.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Transportation Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Develop understanding of analytical models used for traffic flow, intersection delay, transit line operations and urban transportation planning. Develop understanding of how engineering and economic criteria interact to guide decisions regarding system design and operation. Increase awareness of transportation's role with respect to energy usage, environmental quality and the economy. Develop understanding of how transportation systems are financed, the role of public policy, and potential alternative financing methods.", "courseNumber": "3610", "professor": ["Francis Vanek"], "description": "Introduces technological, economic, and social aspects of transportation. Emphasizes design and functioning of transportation systems and their components. Covers supply-demand interactions; system planning, design, and management; traffic flow, intersection control and network analysis; institutional and energy issues; and environmental impacts.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Structural Modeling and Behavior", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand the structural engineering enterprise, the structural modeling process, and the elements of structural behavior. Calculate displacements and stresses of structures by analytical and work/energy methods. Perform analysis of statically indeterminate structures by the stiffness and flexibility methods. Apply the stiffness method of analysis to statically indeterminate truss and beam/column structures via finite element computer programs.", "courseNumber": "3710", "professor": ["Greg McLaskey"], "description": "Introduction to the structural engineering enterprise including aspects of design, loads, behavior, form, modeling, mechanics, materials, analysis, and construction/ manufacturing. Case studies involve different scales and various materials. Topics include analytical and finite-element computational modeling of structural systems, including cables, arches, trusses, beams, frames, and 2-D continua; deflections, strains, and stresses of structural members, systems, and 2-D continua by analytical and work/energy methods, with a focus on linear elastic behavior; the foundations of matrix structural analysis; and the application of finite-element software.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Senior Honors Thesis", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4000", "professor": ["Harry Stewart"], "description": "Supervised research, study, and/or project work resulting in a written report or honors thesis.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Engineering Teaching in CEE", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4010", "professor": ["Monroe Weber-Shirk"], "description": "Methods of instruction developed through discussions with faculty and by assisting with the instruction of undergraduates under the supervision of faculty.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Earthquake Engineering Design", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4070", "professor": ["Mircea Grigoriu", "Greg McLaskey"], "description": "Seismic design of small scale buildings will be optimized to satisfy specified limit states under imposed ground motion records. Shake table tests will be used to validate results of dynamic analysis.\u00a0 Students will work in teams under faculty supervision.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "CEE Undergraduate Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4090", "professor": ["Ruth Richardson"], "description": "Research in any area of civil or environmental engineering on problems under investigation by the department or of special interest to the student, provided that adequate facilities can be obtained. The student must review pertinent literature, prepare a project outline, carry out an approved plan, and submit a formal final report.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Retaining Structures and Slopes", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students gain the ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering. Students gain the ability to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs. Students gain the ability to function on multi-disciplinary teams. Students gain the ability to communicate effectively. Students gain the ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for engineering practice.", "courseNumber": "4410", "professor": ["Thomas O'Rourke"], "description": "Covers earth pressure theories; design of rigid, flexible, braced, tied-back, slurry wall, soil nailing, and reinforced soil structures; stability of excavation, cut, and natural slopes; and design problems stressing application of course material under field conditions of engineering practice.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Soil Dynamics and Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4450", "professor": ["Harry Stewart"], "description": "Study of soil behavior under cyclic and dynamic loading conditions. Foundation design for vibratory loadings. Introductory earthquake engineering including dynamic ground response assessments and field laboratory techniques for determination of dynamic soil properties. Evaluation of soil liquefaction potential during earthquakes by both laboratory and in situ filed methods. Design consideration for embankments and earth retaining structures under seismic loading conditions. Construction blasting and vibration effects on underground systems.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Sustainable Safe Water on Tap", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4520", "professor": ["Monroe Weber-Shirk"], "description": null, "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Laboratory Research in Environmental Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Explore current environmental issues through laboratory experiments and computational simulations that provide a hands-on context for teaching fundamental theories and analytical techniques. Develop problem-solving and laboratory skills using modern instrumentation and computational simulation models. Become familiar with the limitations of real-world laboratory data Develop ability to work effectively in teams. Effectively deliver results in written reports.", "courseNumber": "4530", "professor": ["Monroe Weber-Shirk"], "description": "Laboratory investigations of reactor flow characteristics; acid rain/lake chemistry; contaminated soil-site assessment and remediation; and wastewater treatment.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Environmental Engineering in an International Context II", "offered": "Multi-semester course (Spring).", "outcomes": " Develop an appreciation for the role of respectful relationships and win/win/win interactions in the creation of collaborative networks. Develop a clearer understanding of the challenges and complexity of cross cultural collaboration designed to make the world a better place. Develop the ability to analyze Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) Interventions for common failure modes that include issues of  technology, economics, governance, user preferences, and institutional capacity. Develop the capacity to observe, document those observations, separate inference from observation, and reflect at a deeper level.", "courseNumber": "4561", "professor": ["Monroe Weber-Shirk"], "description": "The course connects the themes of culture, society, and water infrastructure in the context of the global south. The goal of the course is to offer students an experiential learning experience, working with AguaClara partner organizations and civil society organizations in emerging markets and economically disadvantaged communities. Students will learn about the challenges and opportunities of creating sustainable infrastructure, institutional networks, and technical backstopping for water, sanitation, and hygiene. Students synthesize the readings and their observations to develop a clearer understanding of the challenges of cross cultural collaboration designed to make the world a better place.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Analysis and Control of Transportation Systems and Networks", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4620", "professor": ["Samitha Samaranayake"], "description": "This course will cover the development and application of mathematical models and optimization techniques for the analysis and control of transportation systems and networks, with a focus on urban mobility. We will cover topics related to network routing, dynamic traffic models, static and dynamic traffic assignment, traffic control mechanisms and mobility-on-demand systems (including their connections to mass transit). Students will be expected to implement the algorithms covered in class during homework assignments and complete a final project.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Modeling and Computation for Infrastructure Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4660", "professor": ["Samitha Samaranayake"], "description": "Course provide students with a set of quantitative tools for systematic decision making in the context of civil infrastructure systems. The goal is to enable students to develop models and solution strategies based on a \"systems perspective,\"\" which is necessary for intelligent planning and management of largescale infrastructure systems. A major focus of the course will be to motivate the study of quantitative tools that are used for planning and managing these systems via application oriented programming assignments.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to the Behavior of Metal Structures", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understanding of steel as a material; its limitations, strengths, and applications. Understanding of the variability of environmental loading and uncertainty in strength prediction. Understanding the use and origin of standard building codes and specifications. Understand the notion of instability and recognize its unique importance to metal structures. Execute a \"real world\" design within the context of a semester long design project.", "courseNumber": "4740", "professor": ["Christopher Earls"], "description": "Introductory course focused on the use of solid and structural mechanics to quantify elementary behavior of metal structures in order to enable design. The course is project focused; with the students preparing a complete and detailed design deliverable. The course considers applications from civil structures, naval architecture, and aerospace engineering.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Concrete Materials and Construction", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand the influence of various concrete ingredients, and how mixture proportions and concrete behavior are interrelated. Understand cement composition, manufacture, and sustainability issues. Understand physical hydration and microstructure and how microstructure and its development over time leads to macro manifestations of slump loss, setting, and strength gain. Understand how degree of hydration influences construction practices. Understand the challenges of testing and evaluating fresh and harden concrete.", "courseNumber": "4750", "professor": ["Kenneth Hover"], "description": "Covers the materials science, structural engineering, and construction technology involved in the materials aspects of the use of concrete. Topics include cement chemistry and physics, mix design, admixtures, engineering properties, testing of fresh and hardened concrete, and the effects of construction techniques on material behavior.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Structural Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand the behavior of structures subjected to dynamic loads. Know how to calculate displacement time histories. Capable of calculating seismic response of multi degree-of-freedom structures subjected to earthquakes.", "courseNumber": "4780", "professor": ["Mircea Grigoriu"], "description": "Covers modal analysis, numerical methods, and frequency-domain analysis. Introduction to earthquake-resistant design.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "LRFD - Based Engineering of Wood Structures", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " An ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering. An ability to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs. An ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems.", "courseNumber": "4810", "professor": ["Kifle Gebremedhin"], "description": "Computer-aided and manual computation procedures of Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD)-based engineering of wood structures. National design codes and standards; estimation of factored design loads and load combinations; mechanical properties of wood and wood products; designs of beams, columns, trusses, frames, arches, bridges, diaphragms; connections and wood structural systems. Also discusses engineering design judgment as an integral component of the quantitative design procedure. CEE 6075\u00a0includes an exam project and is for CEE MEng students.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Project in Environmental and Water Resources Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5022", "professor": ["Patrick Reed"], "description": "", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Project in Environmental Fluid Mechanics and Hydrology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5032", "professor": ["Edwin (Todd) Cowen"], "description": "", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Project in Geotechnical Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5042", "professor": ["Thomas O'Rourke"], "description": "Design of major geotechnical engineering project. Planning and preliminary design during fall semester; final design completed in January intersession.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Interdisciplinary Master of Engineering Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5050", "professor": ["Antonia Hadjimichael", "Andrea Ippolito"], "description": "Students will participate in a community-engaged, interdisciplinary Master of Engineering (M.Eng.) project to tackle pressing technological and societal challenges surrounding infrastructure, with a specific focus on energy and environmental systems. For example, in 2018/19, projects were focused on Puerto Rico post Hurricane Maria. As part of this course, you will work closely with local stakeholders to hear their perspective on prior challenges and future needs. Each subsequent year will then build upon the prior year's activity to tackle large, complex issues over multiple years. During the course, you will contribute to developing a library of monitoring tools and algorithms which will persist over time and then be applied to solve new challenges with each course iteration.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Project in Environmental Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5052", "professor": ["Monroe Weber-Shirk"], "description": "Student teams conduct research, build working models, design full-scale prototypes, create design algorithms, and create educational materials for technology transfer to improve drinking water quality in the Global South. Satisfies the Master of Engineering project requirement. For more information, see aguaclara.cee.cornell.edu.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Project in Transportation Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5062", "professor": ["Linda Nozick"], "description": "Systems analysis of a substantial transportation service.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Analysis Behavior and Optimization", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5252", "professor": ["David Goldberg"], "description": "This is an advanced course in the application of the systems engineering process to the architecture design and operation of complex systems. Topics include techniques for design, simulation, optimization, and control of complex systems. Case studies and system simulations in diverse areas provide context for the application of these techniques.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Project Management", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5900", "professor": ["Robert Newman"], "description": "Core graduate course in project management for people who will manage technical or engineering projects. Focuses both on the \"technical\" tools of project management (e.g., methods for planning, scheduling, and control) and the \"human\" side (e.g., forming a project team, managing performance, resolving conflicts), with somewhat greater emphasis on the latter.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Engineering Management Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5910", "professor": ["Andrea Ippolito"], "description": "As Engineering Managers, you need to embrace both technical and business skills to tackle complex, sociotechnical challenges, while staying on top of the current pace of technological change. In this Engineering Management project course, we are bridging from your coursework to your role as an engineering manager. To get there, you will practice the tools, themes, and techniques learned in your Engineering Management coursework through the scaffolding of a large project. In CEE 5910, you will work in teams to lead and execute a project in collaboration with an industry partner. You will perform an intensive evaluation of some mixture of the technological and management aspects of a major engineering project or system, conducted with a team of students.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Risk Analysis and Management", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students' should gain an ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science and engineering. Students' should gain an ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems. Students' should gain an understanding of professional and ethical responsibility. Students' should gain the broad education necessary to understand the impact of engineering solutions in a global and societal context. Students' should gain a knowledge of contemporary issues.", "courseNumber": "5970", "professor": ["Jery Stedinger"], "description": "Develops a working knowledge of risk terminology and reliability engineering, analytic tools and models used to analyze safety, environmental and technological risks, and social and psychological risk issues. Discussions address life risks in the United States historical accidents, natural hazards, threat assessment, transportation risks, industrial accidents, waste incineration, air pollution modeling, public health, regulatory policy, risk communication, and risk management.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics: Remote Sensing", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6015", "professor": ["Bill Philpot"], "description": "Students may elect to undertake a project in remote sensing. The work is supervised by a professor in this subject area.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Seminar: Environmental Engineering and Water Resources", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6021", "professor": ["Jery Stedinger"], "description": "Graduate students and faculty members give informal lectures on various topics related to ongoing research in environmental engineering or water resources.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Environmental and Water Resources Systems Analysis", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6025", "professor": ["James Bisogni"], "description": "Supervised study, by individuals or small groups, of one or more specialized topics not covered in regular courses.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Hydraulics", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6035", "professor": ["James Bisogni"], "description": "Special topics in fluid mechanics, hydraulic engineering, or hydrology.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Geotechnical Engineering", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6045", "professor": ["Harry Stewart"], "description": "Supervised study of special topics not covered in the formal courses.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Environmental Engineering", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6055", "professor": ["Jery Stedinger"], "description": "Supervised study in special topics not covered in formal courses.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Transportation", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6065", "professor": ["Linda Nozick"], "description": "Advanced subject matter not covered in depth in other regular courses.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Structural Engineering", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6075", "professor": ["Kifle Gebremedhin"], "description": "Individually supervised study or independent design or research in specialized topics not covered in regular courses.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Seminar: Project Management", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6091", "professor": ["Francis Vanek"], "description": "Weekly seminar aimed at M.Eng students, in particular in the engineering management program. Weekly speaker will come from different engineering applications and discuss insights into project management. Seminar is non-participatory.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Engineering Management", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6095", "professor": ["Andrea Ippolito"], "description": "Individually supervised study of one or more specialized topics not covered in regular courses.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Digital Image Processing", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6150", "professor": ["Bill Philpot"], "description": "An introduction to digital image-processing concepts and techniques, with emphasis on remote-sensing applications. Topics include image acquisition, enhancement procedures, spatial and spectral feature extraction, and classification, with an introduction to hyperspectral data analysis. Assignments require the use of image-processing software and graphics.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Water-Resources Systems Engineering", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6200", "professor": ["Patrick Reed"], "description": "Development and application of deterministic and stochastic optimization and simulation models for aiding in water-resources planning and management. Covers river-basin modeling, including water allocation to multiple purposes, reservoir design and operation, irrigation planning and operation, hydropower-capacity development, flow augmentation, flood control and protection, and urban water supply portfolio management.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Retaining Structures and Slopes", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6410", "professor": ["Thomas O'Rourke"], "description": "Covers Earth pressure theories; design of rigid, flexible, braced, tied-back, slurry wall, soil nailing, and reinforced soil structures; stability of excavation, cut, and natural slopes; and design problems stressing application of course material under field conditions of engineering practice.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Soil Dynamics and Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6450", "professor": ["Harry Stewart"], "description": "Study of soil behavior under cyclic and dynamic loading conditions. Foundation design for vibratory loadings. Introductory earthquake engineering including dynamic ground response assessments and field laboratory techniques for determination of dynamic soil properties.\u00a0 Evaluation of soil liquefaction potential during earthquakes by both laboratory and in situ field methods. Design consideration for embankments and earth retaining structures under seismic loading conditions. Construction blasting and vibration effects on underground systems.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Transport, Mixing, and Transformation in the Environment", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6550", "professor": ["John Albertson"], "description": "Application of fluid mechanics to problems of transport, mixing, and transformation in the water environment. Introduction to advective, diffuse, and dispersive processes in the environment. Boundary interactions: air-water and sediment-water processes. Introduction to chemical and biochemical transformation processes. Applications to transport, mixing, and transformation in rivers, lakes, and coastal waters.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Biological Processes", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6570", "professor": ["April Gu"], "description": "Theoretical and engineering aspects of biological phenomena and processes applicable to the removal of impurities from water, wastewater, and industrial wastes and to their transformation in the environment. Bioenergetics analysis, stoichiometry, biokinetic, and design of biological treatment process.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Environmental Organic Chemistry", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6590", "professor": ["Damian Helbling"], "description": "This course examines the major physical and chemical processes affecting the transport, fate, and treatment of organic chemicals in aquatic systems, including volatilization, sorption/attachment, diffusion, and transformation reactions. The emphasis is on anthropogenic legacy chemicals and chemicals of emerging concern such pharmaceuticals and personal care products. The course examines the relationships between chemical structure, properties, and environmental behavior. Equilibrium and kinetic models based on these principles are used to predict the fate and transport of organic contaminants in the environment.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Analysis and Control of Transportation Systems and Networks", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6620", "professor": ["Samitha Samaranayake"], "description": "This course will cover the development and application of mathematical models and optimization techniques for the analysis and control of transportation systems and networks, with a focus on urban mobility. We will cover topics related to network routing, dynamic traffic models, static and dynamic traffic assignment, traffic control mechanisms and mobility-on-demand systems (including their connections to mass transit). Students will be expected to implement the algorithms covered in class during homework assignments and complete a final project. Students in 6620 will also be required to review and critique research publication in the area of their project.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Multiobjective Systems Engineering Under Uncertainty", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": " Incorporate conflicting objectives, account for system uncertainties, and exploit careful design diagnostics to guide problem formulation and capture key design dependencies. Use and advance software frameworks that combine evolutionary multiobjective optimization, high performance computing, uncertainty modeling techniques, and visual design analytics. Facilitate improved decision making in multi-stakeholder systems engineering design processes. Effectively communicate design analysis results visually and in writing.", "courseNumber": "6660", "professor": ["Patrick Reed"], "description": "Exploration of engineering design frameworks that effectively exploit simulation, optimization, and uncertainty assessments when balancing large numbers of conflicting performance objectives. Students will learn and advance software frameworks that combine evolutionary multiobjective optimization, high performance computing, uncertainty modeling techniques, and visual design analytics. The primary focus will be improving multi-stakeholder design of complex engineered systems. Course concepts will be demonstrated using case studies and projects drawn from the disciplines of the students enrolled.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "3D Printing Parts that Don't Break: From Processing to Performance", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6725", "professor": ["Derek Warner"], "description": "Novel additive manufacturing techniques are appealing in that they offer (1) improved design flexibility, (2) the capability to produce multifunctional components, and (3) an economical route for low volume production runs with less material waste. To utilize additive manufacturing (AM) technology for load bearing applications, one must have a sound understanding of the mechanical performance of components produced with AM methods. Relative to traditional manufacturing techniques, the mechanical performance of AM components is difficult to predict in that it depends not only on the processing route and parameters, but also on the component geometry. This course is aimed at giving students a knowledgebase to understand the connection between various AM processing techniques and the mechanical performance of AM metallic components. By focusing on the fundamental physical processes and features that govern the process-structure-performance relationships, the course is relevant to those interested in understanding the origins of mechanical behavior in metallic components regardless of fabrication process.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Concrete Materials and Construction", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6750", "professor": ["Kenneth Hover"], "description": "Covers the materials science, structural engineering, and construction technology involved in the materials aspects of the use of concrete. Topics include cement chemistry and physics, mix design, admixtures, engineering properties, testing of fresh and hardened concrete, and the effects of construction techniques on material behavior.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Composite Materials", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6760", "professor": ["Stuart Phoenix"], "description": "Topics center around micromechanical and statistical (reliability) aspects of the strength and fatigue of fibrous composites. Topics include Hedgepeth shear-lag models of stress transfer around arrays of fiber breaks; statistical theories of composite failure to forecast reliability; stress distributions around holes and cuts in composite laminates; and compressive strength of composites.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Structural Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6780", "professor": ["Mircea Grigoriu"], "description": "Covers modal analysis, numerical methods, and frequency-domain analysis. Introduces earthquake-resistant design. Students\u00a0are also required to complete an individual or group project assigned by the instructor.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Principles of Project Leadership", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6910", "professor": ["Robert Newman"], "description": "Core graduate course in project management for people who will manage technical or engineering projects. Focuses both on the \"technical\" tools of project management (e.g., methods for planning, scheduling, and control) and the \"human\" side (e.g., forming a project team, managing performance, resolving conflicts), with somewhat greater emphasis on the latter.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Risk Analysis and Management", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6970", "professor": ["Jery Stedinger"], "description": null, "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Research in Structural Engineering", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7070", "professor": ["Greg McLaskey"], "description": "Pursues a branch of structural engineering beyond what is covered in regular courses. Theoretical or experimental investigation of suitable problems.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Structural Concrete", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7740", "professor": ["Kenneth Hover"], "description": "Course is an extension of CEE 6730\u00a0covering design of reinforced and post-tensioned slabs, doubly-reinforced beams, slender columns, deflections, shear walls, deep beams, two-way slab systems, punching shear, and other advanced topics.\u00a0", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Continuum Mechanics and Thermodynamics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7780", "professor": ["Nikolaos Bouklas"], "description": "Topics include kinematics; conservation laws; the entropy inequality; constitutive relations: frame indifference, material symmetry; and finite elasticity, rate-dependent materials, and materials with internal state variables.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis - Remote Sensing", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8100", "professor": ["Bill Philpot"], "description": "The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis - Environmental and Water Resource Systems", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8200", "professor": ["Daniel Loucks"], "description": "The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis - Environmental Fluid Mechanics and Hydrology", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8300", "professor": ["Edwin (Todd) Cowen"], "description": "The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis - Geotechnical Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8400", "professor": ["Thomas O'Rourke"], "description": "The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis - Environmental Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8500", "professor": ["Matthew Reid"], "description": "The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis - Transportation Systems Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8600", "professor": ["H. Oliver Gao"], "description": "The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis - Structural Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8700", "professor": ["Christopher Earls"], "description": "The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.", "subject": "CEE"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis - Civil Infrastructure Systems", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8800", "professor": ["Linda Nozick"], "description": "The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.", "subject": "CEE"}], "MAE": [{"courseTitle": "FWS: Writing about Experiments", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1120", "professor": ["Dan Houck"], "description": null, "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Modeling and Simulation of Real-World Scientific Problems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand \"corner stone\" skills of CSE, including modeling, code verification and validation, error analysis. Use and manipulate software packages to learn how science problems can be represented in computational programs. Be confident in their ability to use computers to solve scientific and engineering problems. Learn practical skills to improve their ability to lead a team, be a good teammate and communicate effectively.", "courseNumber": "1510", "professor": ["Nandini Ananth", "Perrine Pepiot"], "description": "Hands-on introduction to scientific modeling and numerical simulations relevant to computational science and engineering. Students will learn how real-world problems can be solved using models, algorithms, and statistical tools. The course is organized around a set of team-based scientific computing projects drawn from various engineering and life science fields, using actual research and/or industrial computational codes. Leveraging simplified and user-friendly software interfaces and tutorials, the course focuses on the inductive learning of key concepts and topics such as physical and computational model formulation, verification and validation, uncertainty analysis, post-processing and data mining, and a high-level introduction to high performance computing. The course culminates with a community-engaged project, in which students are introduced to the basics of engineering design and team management to develop and animate a scientific computing activity in collaboration with, and tailored for, the Sciencenter. \u00a0Future Science Leaders program for middle- and high-schoolers. No prior programming experience is necessary, and a high-school math level is assumed. Enthusiasm for computer-based activities and interest in community outreach is strongly recommended.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Freshman and Nontechnical Projects in Mechanical Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1900", "professor": ["Nelly Andarawis-Puri"], "description": "Individual or group study or project for students who want to pursue a particular analytical, computational, or experimental investigation outside of regular courses or for informal instruction supplementing that given in regular courses. An engineering report on the project is required of each student. Students must make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor and submit an Undergraduate Research Project Approval Form to the Student Services Office, 108 Upson Hall. Students are expected to spend 3-4 hours per week per credit hour working on the project. May not be used as a technical elective in the ME major. Intended for freshmen on project teams and for project team members performing non-technical\u00a0 tasks.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Statics and Mechanics of Solids", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to draw complete and correct free body diagrams. Apply the principle of equilibrium to calculate external and internal forces in simple, statically determinant mechanical systems, including simple shear and bending moment distributions. Understand the concepts of stress, strain, deformation and elasticity. Analyze the stress, strain and deformation in bars subject to axial, bending and torsional loads. Use the principles of elasticity and equilibrium to solve for stresses in simple statically\r\nindeterminate systems.", "courseNumber": "2020", "professor": ["Meredith Silberstein"], "description": "Covers principles of statics, force systems, and equilibrium in solid structures. Topics include: free body diagrams in two and three dimensions; frames; mechanics of deformable solids; stress and strain; axial force; shear force, bending moment, and torsion in bars and beams; thermal stress; pressure vessles; statically indeterminate problems; buckling and yielding.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Dynamics", "offered": "Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": " Student will be able to draw free-body diagrams and vectors for mechanics. Describe particle motion in 1-D, 2-D and 3-D employing Cartesian, polar, and path coordinates, and rotating coordinate systems. Apply Newton/Euler laws, momentum and work-energy principles to the motion of particles and rigid bodies to find equations of motion and conserved quantities. Recognize simple harmonic motions for 1-degree-of-freedom mechanical systems. Solve equations of motion numerically, and analytically in simple cases, and graphically show the resulting motion(s). Understand measurement of displacement, velocity and acceleration - and use such data to characterize the kinematics of simple mechanisms and 1-degree-of-freedom mechanical systems.", "courseNumber": "2030", "professor": ["Andy Ruina"], "description": "Newtonian dynamics of a particle, systems of particles, rigid bodies, simple mechanisms and simple harmonic oscillators.\u00a0 Impulse, momentum, angular momentum, work and energy. Two-dimensional (planar) kinematics including motion relative to a moving reference frame. Three dimensional rigid-body dynamics are introduced at the instructor's option.\u00a0 Setting up the differential equations of motion and solving them both analytically and numerically with MATLAB. In-lecture laboratory demonstrations illustrate basic principles.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Mechanical Synthesis", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be familiar with the product realization process and its documentation. Be able to formulate and solve simple mathematical models to analyze a design. Appreciate wider issues of design including ethics, liability, safety, environmental and safe disposal. Be able to run simple tests of their designs. Be familiar with basic oral communication and documentation techniques. Be familiar with basic tools of design and manufacturing, such as CAD and machine tools. Be cognizant of safety in manufacturing. Function effectively in a team.", "courseNumber": "2250", "professor": ["Guy Hoffman"], "description": "A hands-on introduction to the mechanical design process, from conceptualization through prototype construction and testing. Design projects provide experience in basic prototyping skills using machine tools, 3D printing and laser cutting, as needed, as well as basic instruction in CAD and technical sketching.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Atomic and Molecular Structure of Matter", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3130", "professor": ["Richard Robinson"], "description": "This course covers the atomic and molecular structure of crystalline and noncrystalline materials as well as selected analytical techniques for structural interrogation. Selected topics include, basic elements of structure; order and disorder; crystals; semicrystalline materials; amorphous materials; molecular materials; x-ray diffraction; small angle x-ray scattering.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Heat Transfer", "offered": "Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": " Become proficient with energy balances to develop models of heat flow in various systems. Learn terminology and principles of heat transfer. Develop broad understanding of basic modes of heat transfer (conduction, convection, radiation) and become proficient at predicting heat transfer rates for these modes including computing the heat transfer coefficient for forced and natural convection. Become proficient at computing radiative exchange between surfaces. Apply basic heat exchanger theory to predict heat exchanger performance for standard designs.", "courseNumber": "3240", "professor": ["C Avedisian"], "description": "Topics include the following: steady and unsteady heat conduction; forced and free convection; external and internal flows; radiation heat transfer; and heat exchangers numerical solutions using ANSYS/FLUENT for conduction and convection.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "System Dynamics", "offered": "Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": " Student will have an ability to build up a correct dynamic model of a complex mechanical or electromechanical system by a divide-and-conquer approach that makes use of physics, constitutive laws, geometry, and whatever other information one may have about the system. An ability to use linear and nonlinear system simulation and analysis tools to study transient and frequency response of systems. An ability to work with modern dynamics lab equipment. An ability to design dynamic parameters in order to meet dynamic performance requirements such as a bound on vibration transmission. An ability to understand and design rudimentary feedback controllers to meet performance specifications on dynamic response.", "courseNumber": "3260", "professor": ["Hadas Ritz"], "description": "Dynamic behavior of mechanical systems: modeling, analysis techniques, and applications; vibrations of single- and multidegree- of-freedom systems; feedback control systems. Computer simulation and experimental studies of vibration and control systems.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Experimental and Applied Mechanics of Structures", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to formulate and solve elasticity problems. Be able to use material properties and structural relationships to design, build and calibrate force transducers. Be able to analyze and experimentally test components of mechanical and aerospace structures.", "courseNumber": "3280", "professor": ["Matthew Miller"], "description": "This course develops the theory of elasticity with a focus on the formulation, solution and application of problems involving mechanical and aerospace structures.\u00a0 The course also provides an introduction to experimental solid mechanics, instrumentation, data analysis and computational mechanics.\u00a0 Emphasis is placed on the integration of analysis with experimental approaches.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Community Wind Energy Research", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand scientific/engineering /environmental issues in developing/operating a wind farm. Understand the fundamentals of operation and deployment of atmospheric, acoustic and environmental measurements. Demonstrate an ability to select and use the techniques and engineering tools necessary to design a project to address their research goals. Be able to analyze and present their data as a technical report describing their project and make clear and effective technical presentations andto scientific and general audiences.", "courseNumber": "4120", "professor": ["Rebecca Barthelmie"], "description": "This is a project based design course. Students will be instructed in the tools and techniques used in planning and developing wind farms and then will work in teams building their own projects focused on an aspect of data collection (atmospheric, environmental, acoustic, wind turbine) and/or analysis at a local wind farm or wind energy facility. Community engagement can also involve developing/presenting education materials. Projects can include developing and deploying new sensors, modeling and data comparison, deploying existing instrumentation in a new configuration or for a particular campaign. The projects must be of utility to the wind farm and /or the surrounding community. All students engage in a 2-4 person wind farm design project.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Community Wind Energy Research", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand scientific/engineering /environmental issues in developing/operating a wind farm. Understand the fundamentals of operation and deployment of atmospheric, acoustic and environmental measurements. Demonstrate an ability to select and use the techniques and engineering tools necessary to design a project to address their research goals. Be able to analyze and present their data as a technical report describing their project and make clear and effective technical presentations and to scientific and general audiences.", "courseNumber": "4121", "professor": ["Rebecca Barthelmie"], "description": "This is a project based design course. Students will be instructed in the tools and techniques used in planning and developing wind farms and then will work in teams building their own projects focused on an aspect of data collection (atmospheric, environmental, acoustic, wind turbine) and/or analysis at a local wind farm or wind energy facility. Community engagement can also involve developing/presenting education materials. Projects can include developing and deploying new sensors, modeling and data comparison, deploying existing instrumentation in a new configuration or for a particular campaign. The projects must be of utility to the wind farm and /or the surrounding community. All students engage in a 2-4 person wind farm design project.\u00a0 In addition, MAE 4121 students undertake this project with the reporting expectations of a senior-design project. If used to fulfil the senior design requirement it must have a significant mechanical engineering design component.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Spacecraft Technology and Systems Architecture", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand, at a higher systems level, space missions and systems, and how the space environment and mission requirements drive spacecraft design. Students will understand the basic fundamentals of spacecraft subsystems, including propulsion, attitude determination and control, power, structures, thermal, communications, and command and data handling. Students will understand typical practices for designing space systems in a contemporary context of US commercial space and government agencies. Students will be able to simulate a spacecraft in operation using state of the art tools, and identify and characterize subsystems for a preliminary spacecraft design.", "courseNumber": "4160", "professor": ["Mason Peck"], "description": "A survey in contemporary space technology from satellite subsystem design through launch and mission operations, focusing on the classical subsystems of robotic and human-rated spacecraft, rockets, planetary rovers, and habitats, and with an emphasis on issue of spacecraft-system architecture and design. Topics covered include subsystem technologies and the systems-engineering principles that tie them together into a spacecraft architecture. Subsystem technologies discussed include communications, thermal subsystems, structure, guidance/navigation/control, spacecraft power, space propulsion, payloads (remote sensing, insitu sensing, human life support), entry/descent/landing, surface mobility, and flight-computer hardware and software. The final project consists of architecting a complete spacecraft system with appropriate subsystems, with designs supported by parametric analysis and simulation. Discussions of current problems and trends in spacecraft operation and development.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Spacecraft Technology and Systems Architecture", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand, at a higher systems level, space missions and systems, and how the space environment and mission requirements drive spacecraft design. Students will understand the basic fundamentals of spacecraft subsystems, including propulsion, attitude determination and control, power, structures, thermal, communications, and command and data handling. Students will understand typical practices for designing space systems in a contemporary context of US commercial space and government agencies. Students will be able to simulate a spacecraft in operation using state of the art tools, and identify and characterize subsystems for a preliminary spacecraft design.", "courseNumber": "4161", "professor": ["Mason Peck"], "description": "A survey in contemporary space technology from satellite subsystem design through launch and mission operations, focusing on the classical subsystems of robotic and human-rated spacecraft, rockets, planetary rovers, and habitats, and with an emphasis on issue of spacecraft-system architecture and design. Topics covered include subsystem technologies and the systems-engineering principles that tie them together into a spacecraft architecture. Subsystem technologies discussed include communications, thermal subsystems, structure, guidance/navigation/control, spacecraft power, space propulsion, payloads (remote sensing, insitu sensing, human life support), entry/descent/landing, surface mobility, and flight-computer hardware and software. The final project consists of architecting a complete spacecraft system with appropriate subsystems, with designs supported by parametric analysis and simulation. Discussions of current problems and trends in spacecraft operation and development. Students will report expectations in a space-system design project in a senior design report.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Autonomous Mobile Robots", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand and implement localization and mapping algorithms using different sensor modalities. Be able to generate a path and the motion for a robot moving around an area with obstacles. Understand and implement the concepts of different approaches for motion planning such as roadmaps, feedback control and sampling based methods. Be able to apply the tools learned in the class to physical robots.", "courseNumber": "4180", "professor": ["Hadas Kress-Gazit"], "description": "Creating robots capable of performing complex tasks autonomously requires one to address a variety of different challenges such as sensing, perception, control, planning, mechanical design, and interaction with humans. In recent years many advances have been made toward creating such systems, both in the research community (different robot challenges and competitions) and in industry (industrial, military, and domestic robots). This course gives an overview of the challenges and techniques used for creating autonomous mobile robots. Topics include sensing, localization, mapping, path planning, motion planning, obstacle and collision avoidance, and multi-robot control.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Intermediate Fluid Dynamics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand the derivation and physical meaning of the conservation equations. Be able to derive analytical solutions to simplified problems. Understand the underlying models in ANSYS/FLUENT. Be able to apply ANSYS/FLUENT to solve a range of problems. Understand numerical methods and the limitations of CFD. Demonstrate the ability to design a component using CFD analysis in ANSYS/FLUENT.", "courseNumber": "4230", "professor": ["Olivier Desjardins"], "description": "This course builds on the foundation of MAE 3230. The lectures emphasize on the physics and mathematical analysis of the subject. Topics include incompressible flows, compressible flows, and computational fluid dynamics.\u00a0As an integral part of the course, you will learn numerical method and how to use ANSYS/Fluent to solve flow problems. The students will develop problem-solving skills, through which to cultivate an appreciation for the rich and complex structure of fluids,\u00a0and appreciation for fundamental ideas in fluid dynamics.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Intermediate Fluid Dynamics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand the derivation and physical meaning of the conservation equations. Be able to derive analytical solutions to simplified problems. Understand the underlying models in ANSYS/FLUENT. Be able to apply ANSYS/FLUENT to solve a range of problems. Understand numerical methods and the limitations of CFD. Demonstrate the ability to design a component using CFD analysis in ANSYS/FLUENT.", "courseNumber": "4231", "professor": ["Olivier Desjardins"], "description": "This course builds on the foundation of MAE 3230. The lectures emphasize on the physics and mathematical analysis of the subject. Topics include incompressible flows, compressible flows, and computational fluid dynamics.\u00a0As an integral part of the course, you will learn numerical method and how to use ANSYS/Fluent to solve flow problems. The students will develop problem-solving skills, through which to cultivate an appreciation for the rich and complex structure of fluids,\u00a0and appreciation for fundamental ideas in fluid dynamics.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "FSAE Automotive Design Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will have learned and be able to apply mathematical, engineering, and communication skills and tools.  Be able to solve problems, and function in a professional environment.  Be able to learn how to learn information not covered in formal courses one has taken. Be able to design vehicles that will win the Formula SAE competition.  This requires an engineering systems view: consider the customers, requirements, functions, structure and implementation.  To learn how to maximize the points the team will win in the competition: trading off cost, time, technology, training, etc. Developed an enjoyment of engineering and the team. Have created conditions for future teams to be able to win via learning how to utilize engineering research and knowledge engineering.", "courseNumber": "4250", "professor": ["John Richard Callister"], "description": "Project course to research, design, build, develop, and compete with a Formula SAE car for intercollegiate competition. Students work in interdisciplinary teams using concurrent engineering and systems engineering principles applied to complex mechanical, electromechanical, and electronic systems.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Supervised Senior Design Experience", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4291", "professor": ["Nelly Andarawis-Puri"], "description": "Substantial design experience based on the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier course work and incorporating engineering standards and realistic constraints. Sections of this course satisfy the BS ME senior design requirement. 3-credit sections are directed by a faculty member as an individual or a team design exercise. Consult www.mae.cornell.edu for enrollment details.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Computer-Aided Engineering: Applications to Biological Processes", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " An ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering. An ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems. A recognition of the need for, and an ability to engage in life-long learning. An ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for engineering practice for engineering practice. An ability to integrate modern biology with engineering principles.", "courseNumber": "4530", "professor": ["Ashim Datta"], "description": "Introduction to simulation-based design as an alternative to prototype-based design; analysis and optimization of complex real-life processes for design and research, using industry-standard physics-based computational software. Emphasis is on problem formulation, starting from a real process and developing its computer model. Covers biomedical processes in thermal therapy and drug delivery that involve heat transfer, mass transfer, and fluid flow. Computational topics introduce the finite-element method, pre- and post-processing, and pitfalls of using computational software. Students choose their own semester-long biomedical project, which is the major part of the course (no final exam).", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Controlled Fusion: Principles and Technology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand the scientific basis for controlled fusion by both magnetic confinement and inertial confinement approaches, as well as the technological requirements for practical electric power generation by the controlled fusion process. Be able determine the energy release of any nuclear reaction or reaction chain using the mass-energy relationship, and be able to solve well-posed engineering problems in plasma physics as applied to controlled fusion using Maxwell's equations and the equations of motion of charged particles in electric and magnetic fields. Be able to solve well-posed engineering problems in energy generation by controlled fusion having to do with the properties of materials in the presence of neutron irradiation and other relevant processes. Understand the fundamental role played by energy in our society and in the developing world, the potential role fusion can play, and the reasons that it is potentially more attractive than fission-based electric power generation. Be able to determine the state-of-the-art of different aspects of fusion reactor design by independent study using books, journals, conference proceedings, reports on the web and personal communication with experts.", "courseNumber": "4590", "professor": ["David Hammer"], "description": "Introduction to the physical principles and various engineering aspects underlying power generation by controlled fusion. Topics include fuels and conditions required for fusion power and basic fusion-reactor concepts; fundamental aspects of plasma physics relevant to fusion plasmas and basic engineering problems for a fusion reactor; and an engineering analysis of proposed magnetic and/or inertial confinement fusion-reactor designs.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Entrepreneurship for Engineers", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to read and understand private equity term sheets and analyze businesses from financial and strategic perspectives. Be able to provide written and oral communications in a business setting and work on a team. Understand market forces, pricing, competition, the nature of the process of entrepreneurship, and operational aspects of starting new technology-based businesses. Be familiar with the common forms of intellectual property protection. Appreciate the ethical issues that are found in entrepreneurial activities.", "courseNumber": "4610", "professor": ["John Richard Callister"], "description": "Develops skills necessary to identify, evaluate, and begin new business ventures. Topics include intellectual property, competition, strategy, business plans, technology forecasting, finance and accounting, and sources of capital. A rigorous, quantitative approach is stressed throughout, and students create financial documents and plans, analyze human resource models, and work with sophisticated valuation methods, complicated equity structures, and legal and business documents. As such, this course represents the \"red meat\" of entrepreneurship, and the soft skills are left for other courses. Course work consists of discussions, assignments, and the preparation and presentation of a complete business plan.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Orthopaedic Tissue Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will know and understand the function and physiology of bone, cartilage, tendon and ligament as organs and tissue. Apply strength of materials concepts to the mechanical behavior of musculoskeletal tissues and organs. Understand the unique adaptive capacity of musculoskeletal tissues to their mechanical environment. Integrate and interpret biological data and mechanical engineering concepts.", "courseNumber": "4640", "professor": ["Christopher Hernandez, Professor"], "description": "Application of mechanics and materials principles to orthopaedic tissues. Physiology of bone, cartilage, ligament, and tendon and the relationship of these properties to their mechanical function. Mechanical behavior of skeletal tissues. Functional adaptation of these tissues to their mechanical environment. Tissue engineering of replacement structures.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Orthopaedic Tissue Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will know and understand the function and physiology of bone, cartilage, tendon and ligament as organs and tissues. Apply strength of materials concepts to the mechanical behavior of musculoskeletal tissues and organs. Understand the unique adaptive capacity of musculoskeletal tissues to their mechanical environment. Integrate and interpret biological data and mechanical engineering concepts.", "courseNumber": "4641", "professor": ["Christopher Hernandez, Professor"], "description": "Application of mechanics and materials principles to orthopaedic tissues. Physiology of bone, cartilage, ligament, and tendon and the relationship of these properties to their mechanical function. Mechanical behavior of skeletal tissues. Functional adaptation of these tissues to their mechanical environment. Tissue engineering of replacement structures. Senior Design report required.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Biofluid Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Introduce and practice the use of the fundamental engineering principles and mathematical basis of fluid mechanics in human body. Enable the students to identify the fluid flow and transport in human body, and to formulate the governing conservation equations, and solve basic engineering biofluidic problems. Understand and correctly identify modeling assumptions used to solve various biofluidic problems. Enable the students to analyze if Biofluid mechanics a cause or an outcome of a disease and where the analysis might involve approximations and empirical approaches; for example, arterial flows and boundary layer flows. Encourage students to formulate an ordered approach to problem solving towards designing an alternative system to circumvent disease. Integrate and interpret biological data and mechanical engineering concepts.", "courseNumber": "4650", "professor": ["Ankur Singh"], "description": "The transport of energy, mass, and momentum is essential to the function of living systems. Changes in these processes often underlie pathological conditions. This course covers the understanding and analysis of micro-macroscopic fluid flow phenomena within the human body and the relation between fluid flow and physiological processes. The topics covered in this course span from cellular level to organs under healthy and diseased conditions.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Biofluid Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Introduce and practice the use of the fundamental engineering principles and mathematical basis of fluid mechanics in human body. Enable the students to identify the fluid flow and transport in human body, and to formulate the governing conservation equations, and solve basic engineering biofluidic problems. Understand and correctly identify modeling assumptions used to solve various biofluidic problems. Enable the students to analyze if Biofluid mechanics a cause or an outcome of a disease and where the analysis might involve approximations and empirical approaches; for example, arterial flows and boundary layer flows. Encourage students to formulate an ordered approach to problem solving towards designing an alternative system to circumvent disease. Integrate and interpret biological data and mechanical engineering concepts.", "courseNumber": "4651", "professor": ["Ankur Singh"], "description": "The transport of energy, mass, and momentum is essential to the function of living systems. Changes in these processes often underlie pathological conditions. This course covers the understanding and analysis of micro-macroscopic fluid flow phenomena within the human body and the relation between fluid flow and physiological processes. The topics covered in this course span from cellular level to organs under healthy and diseased conditions.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Automotive Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to perform basic calculations for internal combustion spark ignition engines, including turbochargers and superchargers. Calculate the power and torque required to operate a vehicle under various loads. Calculate braking and acceleration performance. Calculate the dynamic stability of vehicles. Calculate steering and suspension performance.", "courseNumber": "4860", "professor": ["John Richard Callister"], "description": "Selected topics in the analysis and design of vehicle components and vehicle systems. Emphasis on automobiles. Engines, transmissions, suspension, brakes, and aerodynamics are discussed. The course uses first principles and applies them to specific systems. The course is highly quantitative, using empirical and analytical approaches.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Automotive Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4861", "professor": ["John Richard Callister"], "description": "Selected topics in the analysis and design of vehicle components and vehicle systems. Emphasis on automobiles. Engines, transmissions, suspension, brakes, and aerodynamics are discussed. The course uses first principles and applies them to specific systems. The course is highly quantitative, using empirical and analytical approaches. Senior Design report required.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Individual and Group Projects in Mechanical Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4900", "professor": ["Nelly Andarawis-Puri"], "description": "Individual or group study or project for students who want to pursue a particular analytical, computational, or experimental investigation outside of regular courses or for informal instruction supplementing that given in regular courses. An engineering report on the project is required of each student. Students must make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor and submit an Undergraduate Research Project Approval Form to the Student Services Office, 108 Upson Hall. Students are expected to spend 3-4 hours per week per credit hour working on the project.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Teaching Experience in Mechanical Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4980", "professor": ["Elizabeth Fisher"], "description": "Students serve as teaching assistants in Cornell Mechanical Engineering classes or in local middle school technology classes.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "International Research Internship", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4998", "professor": ["Daniel Selva"], "description": null, "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Future Energy Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be proficient in engineering calculations of the performance and rudimentary design of various energy conversion systems. Familiar with the physics of the environmental issues, including the greenhouse effect and global climate change. Adept in the comparative analysis of various energy conversion systems.  The comparisons will include cost, social acceptability as well as environmental consequences.", "courseNumber": "5010", "professor": ["K. Max Zhang"], "description": "Critically examines the technology of energy systems that will be acceptable in a world faced with global climate change, local pollution, and declining supplies of oil. The focus is on renewable energy sources (wind, solar, biomass), but other non-carbon-emitting sources (nuclear) and lowered-carbon sources (co-generative gas turbine plants, fuel cells) also are studied. Both the devices and the overall systems are analyzed.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Dynamics of Flight Vehicles", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand the nature of aerodynamic forces and moments (aerodynamic stability derivatives) in determining the motions of a flight vehicle. Understand the various terms in the equations of motion and the simplifications arising from assumptions of small disturbances from equilibrium flight and from the bi-lateral symmetry of most aircraft. Be able to identify, formulate and solve engineering problems in aircraft flight dynamics. Understand the principal constraints imposed on aircraft design by stability and controllability requirements.", "courseNumber": "5070", "professor": ["Perrine Pepiot"], "description": "Introduction to stability and control of atmospheric-flight vehicles. The dynamics governing the motion of aircrafts are explored through a series of case studies, each focusing on different flight stages or configurations. Review of aerodynamic forces and methods for analysis of linear systems. Static stability and control. Small disturbance equations of unsteady motion. Dynamic stability of longitudinal and lateral-directional motions; transient response. Simulation of large motions of aircrafts.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "3D Printing Parts that Don't Break: From Processing to Performance", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5120", "professor": ["Derek Warner"], "description": "Novel additive manufacturing techniques are appealing in that they offer (1) improved design flexibility, (2) the capability to produce multifunctional components, and (3) an economical route for low volume production runs with less material waste. To utilize additive manufacturing (AM) technology for load bearing applications, one must have a sound understanding of the mechanical performance of components produced with AM methods. Relative to traditional manufacturing techniques, the mechanical performance of AM components is difficult to predict in that it depends not only on the processing route and parameters, but also on the component geometry. This course is aimed at giving students a knowledgebase to understand the connection between various AM processing techniques and the mechanical performance of AM metallic components. By focusing on the fundamental physical processes and features that govern the process-structure-performance relationships, the course is relevant to those interested in understanding the origins of mechanical behavior in metallic components regardless of fabrication process.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Mechanical Properties of Thin Films", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5130", "professor": ["Shefford Baker"], "description": "Relationships between microstructure and mechanical behavior in thin films and other nanoscale structures. Topics include stresses, elastic and plastic deformation, creep and anelasticity, and fracture and delamination; and how mechanical behavior at the nanoscale deviates from the predictions of scaling laws derived for bulk materials. Applications in microelectronics, optics, microelectromechanical systems, coatings, etc.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Spacecraft Technology and Systems Architecture", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5160", "professor": ["Mason Peck"], "description": "A survey in contemporary space technology from satellite subsystem design through launch and mission operations, focusing on the classical subsystems of robotic and human-rated spacecraft, rockets, planetary rovers, and habitats, and with an emphasis on issue of spacecraft-system architecture and design. Topics covered include subsystem technologies and the systems-engineering principles that tie them together into a spacecraft architecture. Subsystem technologies discussed include communications, thermal subsystems, structure, guidance/navigation/control, spacecraft power, space propulsion, payloads (remote sensing, insitu sensing, human life support), entry/descent/landing, surface mobility, and flight-computer hardware and software. The final project consists of architecting a complete spacecraft system with appropriate subsystems, with designs supported by parametric analysis and simulation. Discussions of current problems and trends in spacecraft operation and development. Students in MAE 5160 will complete an additional project: an in-depth study of a space-technology problem to be integrated with a space-system design project.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Autonomous Mobile Robots", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand and implement localization and mapping algorithms using different sensor modalities. Be able to generate a path and the motion for a robot moving around an area with obstacles. Understand and implement the concepts of different approaches for motion planning such as roadmaps, feedback control and sampling based methods. Be able to apply the tools learned in the class to physical robots.", "courseNumber": "5180", "professor": ["Hadas Kress-Gazit"], "description": "Creating robots capable of performing complex tasks autonomously requires one to address a variety of different challenges such as sensing, perception, control, planning, mechanical design, and interaction with humans. In recent years many advances have been made toward creating such systems, both in the research community (different robot challenges and competitions) and in industry (industrial, military, and domestic robots). This course gives an overview of the challenges and techniques used for creating autonomous mobile robots. Topics include sensing, localization, mapping, path planning, motion planning, obstacle and collision avoidance, and multi-robot control.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Dimensional Tolerancing in Mechanical Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5210", "professor": ["H. Voelcker"], "description": "Designers use dimensional tolerances to limit spatial variations in mechanical parts and assemblies; the goals are interchangeability in assembly, performance, and cost. This course covers traditional limit tolerances briefly, but focuses mainly on modern geometric tolerances and their role in assembly control. Students are not required to complete the problem and project assignments. Students will learn the main concepts, principles, and techniques of dimensional tolerancing, but will not perform any assembly or tolerance analysis and design.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Intermediate Fluid Dynamics with CFD", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Course enables students to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering. Course enables students to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs within realistic constraints such as economic, environmental, social, political, ethical, health and safety, manufacturability, and sustainability. Course enables students to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems. Course provides students with the broad education necessary to understand the impact of engineering solutions in a global, economic, environmental, and social context. Course enables students to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for engineering practice.", "courseNumber": "5230", "professor": ["Olivier Desjardins"], "description": "Builds on the foundation of\u00a0MAE 3230. The lectures emphasize on the physics and mathematical analysis of the subject. Topics include incompressible flows, compressible flows, and computational fluid dynamics.\u00a0As an integral part of the course, you will learn numerical method and how to use ANSYS/Fluent to solve flow problems. The students will develop problem-solving skills, through which to cultivate an appreciation for the rich and complex structure of fluids,\u00a0and appreciation for fundamental ideas in fluid dynamics.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Design for Manufacture and Assembly", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5260", "professor": ["Fenton O'Shea"], "description": "Successful component and system design is dependent on the ability to specify products that balance cost, performance, and component robustness. This course will consider methods for design optimization that are driven by an attention to manufacturing and assembly processes while maintaining consideration for functional sensitivities.\u00a0", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Combustion Processes", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to use tabulated enthalpy or internal energies to calculate an adiabatic flame temperature, and to use tables or software to calculate equilibrium mixtures of perfect gases. Calculate concentration time-histories in elementary kinetic mechanisms such as the formation of NO, the combustion of CO, or the combustion of hydrogen. Calculate the stability and performance of elementary combustion systems such as the one-dimensional detonation wave, the well-stirred reactor, and the Bunsen burner. Understand balance laws for mass, momentum, energy and species conservation and their application to diffusion-limited combustion such as in the gas phase, around spherical droplets or on solid spheres. Appreciate the complexity of real combustion systems and the importance of this field in society.", "courseNumber": "5430", "professor": ["Michel Louge"], "description": "An introduction to combustion and flame processes, with emphasis on fundamental fluid dynamics, heat and mass transport, and reaction-kinetic processes that govern combustion rates. Topics include thermochemistry, kinetics, vessel explosions, laminar premixed and diffusion flames, and droplet combustion. Optional topics may include complex combustion systems, turbulent flames, fuel cells, or combustion of solids.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Energy Seminar II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5469", "professor": ["Lynden Archer", "David Hammer", "K. Max Zhang"], "description": "Energy resources, their conversion to electricity or mechanical work, and the environmental consequences of the energy cycle are discussed by faculty members from several departments in the university and by outside experts. Topics include energy resources and economics; coal-based electricity generation; nuclear reactors; solar power; energy conservation by users; and air pollution control.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Orthopaedic Tissue Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will know and understand the function and physiology of bone, cartilage, tendon and ligament as organs and tissue. Apply strength of materials concepts to the mechanical behavior of musculoskeletal tissues and organs. Understand the unique adaptive capacity of musculoskeletal tissues to their mechanical environment. Integrate and interpret biological data and mechanical engineering concepts.", "courseNumber": "5640", "professor": ["Christopher Hernandez, Professor"], "description": "Application of mechanics and materials principles to orthopaedic tissues. Physiology of bone, cartilage, ligament, and tendon and the relationship of these properties to their mechanical function. Mechanical behavior of skeletal tissues. Functional adaptation of these tissues to their mechanical environment. Tissue engineering of replacement structures.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Biofluid Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5650", "professor": ["Ankur Singh"], "description": "The transport of energy, mass, and momentum is essential to the function of living systems. Changes in these processes often underlie pathological conditions. This course covers the understanding and analysis of micro-macroscopic fluid flow phenomena within the human body and the relation between fluid flow and physiological processes. The topics covered in this course span from cellular level to organs under healthy and diseased conditions.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5790", "professor": ["Andy Borum"], "description": "Introduction to nonlinear dynamics, with applications to physics, engineering, biology, and chemistry. Emphasizes analytical methods, concrete examples, and geometric thinking. Topics include one-dimensional systems; bifurcations; phase plane; nonlinear oscillators; and Lorenz equations, chaos, strange attractors, fractals, iterated mappings, period doubling, renormalization.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Automotive Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to perform basic calculations for internal combustion spark ignition engines, including turbochargers and superchargers. Calculate the power and torque required to operate a vehicle under various loads. Calculate braking and acceleration performance. Calculate the dynamic stability of vehicles. Calculate steering and suspension performance.", "courseNumber": "5860", "professor": ["John Richard Callister"], "description": "Selected topics in the analysis and design of vehicle components and vehicle systems. Emphasis on automobiles. Engines, transmissions, suspension, brakes, and aerodynamics are discussed. The course uses first principles and applies them to specific systems. The course is highly quantitative, using empirical and analytical approaches.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Analysis Behavior and Optimization", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5920", "professor": ["David Goldberg"], "description": "This is an advanced course in the application of the systems engineering process to the architecture design and operation of complex systems. Topics include techniques for design, simulation, optimization, and control of complex systems. Case studies and system simulations in diverse areas provide context for the application of these techniques.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Professional Development for Master of Engineering in MAE", "offered": "Fall, spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5940", "professor": ["Matt Ulinski"], "description": "Covers tools needed to build skills for career development and the job search. Also covers a process to organize, complete and present the Master of Engineering Project.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Theory and Practice of Systems Architecture", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5950", "professor": ["H. Oliver Gao"], "description": "Every system has an architecture (its essence, or DNA), i.e., a high-level abstraction of its design that provides a unifying concept for detailed design and commits most of the system's performance and lifecycle cost. This course presents the frameworks, methods, and tools required to analyze and synthesize system architectures. The course has a theory part that emphasizes synergies between humans and computers in the architecture process, and a practical part based on a long project and guest lectures by real system architects. The theory part covers topics such as architecture views, layers and projections, stakeholder networks, dealing with fuzziness, automatic concept generation, architecture space exploration, patterns and styles, heuristics, and knowledge engineering. The practice part focuses on special topics such as commonality, platforming, reuse, upstream and downstream influences, and software architecture.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Composite Materials", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6160", "professor": ["Stuart Phoenix"], "description": "Topics center around micromechanical and statistical (reliability) aspects of the strength and fatigue of fibrous composites. Topics include Hedgepeth shear-lag models of stress transfer around arrays of fiber breaks; statistical theories of composite failure to forecast reliability; stress distributions around holes and cuts in composite laminates; and compressive strength of composites.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Turbulence and Turbulent Flows", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6310", "professor": ["Gregory Bewley"], "description": "Topics include the nature of turbulence and its physical manifestations, statistical description and scales of turbulent motion, turbulent free shear flows and wall bounded flows, Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations and closure models, introduction to large-eddy simulation, and mixing and reaction in turbulent flows.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Space Exploration Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6530", "professor": ["Dmitry Savransky"], "description": "A graduate-level survey course on the engineering problems associated with the remote and in-situ exploration of space, with a particular focus on current and near-future practices and tools.\u00a0 Topics covered include science-driven robotic and human exploration of the solar system, astrophysical observatories, and exoplanet detection and characterization.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Biomedical Technologies for Point-of-Care Diagnostics and Mobile and Global Health", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6620", "professor": ["David Erickson"], "description": "The goal of \"point-of-care\" or \"point-of-need\" biomedical technologies is to enable delivery of healthcare services without having to leave the vicinity of the patient. Existing examples in diagnostics include everything from clinical heart-rate, blood pressure, and pulse oximetry monitors to home-based glucose devices for diabetics. Broadly speaking, point-of care/need technologies have two major purposes, the first, to reduce the time required to provide information about a medical or physical condition and secondly, to enable patients to maintain/monitor their own health status without having to visit a clinic.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Soft Tissue Biomechanics II: Viscoelasticity and Phasic Theory", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6670", "professor": ["Nelly Andarawis-Puri"], "description": "Application of mechanics and materials principles to orthopaedic soft tissues. Mechanical properties of cartilage, tendon, and ligaments; applied viscoelasticity theory for cartilage, tendon, and ligament; cartilage, tendon, and ligament biology; tendon and ligament wound healing; osteoarthritis.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Dynamics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6700", "professor": ["Mason Peck"], "description": "Advanced dynamics of particles and rigid objects with emphasis on 3D systems. Topics include: Rotations with Diads and matrices, angular velocity, Euler equations, top, rolling disk,\u00a0Hamilton's principle and Lagrange equations; stability theory; and approaches to multi-object systems. Examples will come from celestial mechanics, machines, robotics and vehicle dynamics.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Nonlinear Vibrations", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6750", "professor": ["Richard Rand"], "description": "Dynamics of nonlinear oscillators, including free and forced vibrations of both conservative and limit cycle oscillators, parametric excitation, systems of two, and N-coupled oscillators.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Investigations in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6900", "professor": ["Nelly Andarawis-Puri"], "description": "Project-based course in the area of mechanical or aerospace engineering under the guidance of a faculty member.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "M.Eng. Independent Study", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6910", "professor": ["Matt Ulinski"], "description": "Independent study at the MEng course level.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6950", "professor": ["Hadas Kress-Gazit"], "description": "Special lectures by faculty members on topics of current research.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Research Internship for International Students", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6998", "professor": ["Christopher Hernandez, Professor"], "description": null, "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Fracture Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7160", "professor": ["Alan Zehnder"], "description": "Mechanics of fracture, including linear elastic and elastic-plastic fracture theory, energy release rate, J integral, experimental methods, computational fracture mechanics and applications.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Continuum Mechanics and Thermodynamics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7880", "professor": ["Nikolaos Bouklas"], "description": "Topics include kinematics; conservation laws; the entropy inequality; constitutive relations: frame indifference, material symmetry; and finite elasticity, rate-dependent materials, and materials with internal state variables.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Colloquium", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7999", "professor": ["Nikolaos Bouklas"], "description": "Lectures by visiting scientists and Cornell faculty and staff members on research topics of current interest in mechanical and aerospace science, especially in connection with new research.", "subject": "MAE"}, {"courseTitle": "Research in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8900", "professor": ["Christopher Hernandez, Professor"], "description": "Independent research in an area of mechanical and aerospace engineering under the guidance of a member of the faculty.", "subject": "MAE"}], "CHEME": [{"courseTitle": "Modeling and Simulation of Real-World Scientific Problems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand \"corner stone\" skills of CSE, including modeling, code verification and validation, error analysis. Use and manipulate software packages to learn how science problems can be represented in computational programs. Be confident in their ability to use computers to solve scientific and engineering problems. Learn practical skills to improve their ability to lead a team, be a good teammate and communicate effectively.", "courseNumber": "1510", "professor": ["Nandini Ananth", "Perrine Pepiot"], "description": "Hands-on introduction to scientific modeling and numerical simulations relevant to computational science and engineering. Students will learn how real-world problems can be solved using models, algorithms, and statistical tools. The course is organized around a set of team-based scientific computing projects drawn from various engineering and life science fields, using actual research and/or industrial computational codes. Leveraging simplified and user-friendly software interfaces and tutorials, the course focuses on the inductive learning of key concepts and topics such as physical and computational model formulation, verification and validation, uncertainty analysis, post-processing and data mining, and a high-level introduction to high performance computing. The course culminates with a community-engaged project, in which students are introduced to the basics of engineering design and team management to develop and animate a scientific computing activity in collaboration with, and tailored for, the Sciencenter. \u00a0Future Science Leaders program for middle- and high-schoolers. No prior programming experience is necessary, and a high-school math level is assumed. Enthusiasm for computer-based activities and interest in community outreach is strongly recommended.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Career Perspectives", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Assist with a specialized job search. (j) See the application of specific ChemE fundamentals such as process development and product development in the workplace. (h) Understand the extent of degree required, progression in industry, managerial technical ladder, career options and the importance of teamwork in specific careers. (i) Emphasis on safety and ethics particularly in the pharmaceutical industry. (f)", "courseNumber": "3010", "professor": ["T. Michael Duncan"], "description": "Weekly presentations by visiting chemical and biomolecular engineers to describe career paths and current professions. Job overviews and day-to-day details. Lessons learned from experiences.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Fluid Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Demonstrate the ability to explain the physical mechanisms governing fluid behavior in a variety of materials and settings. (a,g) Solution of the equations of motion: solution of the microscopic balance equations for hydrostatics, unidirectional flows, boundary layer flows, and other simple flow situations. (a,e,k) Solving engineering fluid dynamics applications involving macroscopic mass and momentum balances, and Bernoulli's equations.  Use of macroscopic balances together with unidirectional flow analysis. (a,e,k) Understanding the role of nonlinearity, instability, and turbulence in fluid dynamics. (a,g)", "courseNumber": "3230", "professor": ["Lynden Archer"], "description": "Fundamentals of fluid mechanics. Macroscopic and microscopic balances. Applications to problems involving viscous flow.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Analysis of Separation Processes", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Combine mass balances, energy balances, thermodynamic equilibrium constraints, and constitutive models for convective mass transfer to develop mathematical models for the performance of various separation systems. (a,d,e,i,k) Optimize designs of separation systems to achieve targets for product purity. (a,c,d,e,i,k) Acquire experience using modern computer software for designing separation processes. (a,c,d,e,j,k) Develop and apply criteria for selecting among available separation technologies. (c,d,k)", "courseNumber": "3320", "professor": ["A. Anton"], "description": "Analysis and design of chemical separation processes involving phase equilibria and mass transfer. Topics include: continuous and batch processing; counter-current and co-current flow patterns; tray columns and packed columns for distillation, gas absorption/stripping, and liquid-liquid extraction; batch separation by selective adsorption on solids; continuous separation by selective permeation through membranes; and choosing among separation options.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Applied Process Control", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3700", "professor": ["Frank Lomax"], "description": "Applying control theory to heavy industrial process in energy, chemical processing, water treatment and food processing. Use of state of the art measurement, control equipment and software tools. Documentation of process control systems, sizing, applying and selecting appropriate measurement devices for common process variables. Study of industrial process units employed for design measurement and control systems that are robust and provide a high degree of safety. Commissioning and tuning an integrated pilot-scale chemical plant.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Process Dynamics and Control", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students apply mathematical analysis to develop models for chemical process systems. (a,c,e,j,k) Students complete all problem sets in groups of 2-3 people. (d,g) The first problem set is an open-ended assignment, which helps introduce basic concepts of control, including the identification of variables, parameters, inputs an outputs.  Students are encouraged to select a system that is not a traditional chemical process. (j,k)", "courseNumber": "3720", "professor": ["James Engstrom"], "description": "Modeling and analysis of the dynamics of chemical processes, Laplace transforms, block diagrams, feedback control systems, and stability analysis.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Chemical Kinetics and Reactor Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Develop a sound fundamental (molecular level) understanding of chemical reaction kinetics. (a, b, e, k) Develop practical approaches to modeling complex reactions to obtain a rate equation; (1) identify dominant effects and estimate the consequences of neglecting secondary effects, (2) test assumptions and assess predictions, and (3) perform numerical analysis. (a ,b, c, e, k) Develop the ability to construct from first principles mathematical models to predict system behavior. (a, c, e, k) Develop approaches to optimize reactor design with regard to multiple performance criteria. (a, c, e, k)", "courseNumber": "3900", "professor": ["T. Michael Duncan"], "description": "Study of chemical reaction kinetics and principles of reactor design for chemical processes.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Molecular Principles of Biomedical Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4020", "professor": ["Rula Abbud-Antaki"], "description": "Genomic and proteomic thinking and tools have revolutionized the way scientists study biology and medicine. We are now beginning to understand the molecular level mechanisms that underlie normal and pathologic cellular functions. As a consequence, novel molecular level approaches provide the basis for better diagnostic and therapeutic strategies to effectively treat or prevent human diseases. This course aims to present a broad overview of molecular level techniques that are relevant in many aspects of biomedical engineering. We will discuss the underlying principles, how to interpret representative data, limitations of current approaches, and engineering challenges for the development of new and improved techniques.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Chemical Process Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " By simulating a corporate work environment the students are introduced to the demands and expectations that they will face when they enter the workforce, and are thus better prepared to function in either the academic or the corporate environment. (c) Each system design within the overall plant design requires the identification of relevant process design parameters and the solution of chemical engineering calculations to arrive at a design recommendation. The students are also taught an in house capital cost estimating algorithm, which they must use in determining the capital cost of their recommended designs. (e)  The students use Aspen Tech Process Simulator and the ASPEN cost estimating system to first simulate and then determine the capital and operating cost of their design solutions. (k) The students work in either three or four member teams and learn by experience and by instruction how to manage team dynamics to complete the work in a timely fashion. (d) The students prepare power point presentations describing the results of their work for the week and present them to professors and TA's who critically evaluate both content and presentation. Written clarification memos for points arising from the presentation are also required. (g) Stress is placed on the concept of designing to minimize environmental footprint and good corporate stewardship in design. (f)", "courseNumber": "4620", "professor": ["Alex Woltornist"], "description": "Students prepare a full-scale feasibility study of a chemical process including product supply and demand forecasts, development of mass and energy balances and a process flow sheet sufficient for estimating the capital and operating costs of the process facilities. Students also define all off plot support facilities and estimate the capital and operating costs of those facilities as well. This information is used to develop an economic analysis of the facilities and to provide an ultimate recommendation as to the viability of the project.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Practice of Chemical Engineering Product Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " By simulating a corporate work environment the students are introduced to the demands and expectations that they will face when they enter the workforce, and are thus better prepared to function in either the academic or the corporate environment. (c) Each system design within the overall product design requires the identification of relevant design parameters and the solution of chemical engineering calculations to arrive at a design recommendation. The students are also taught an in house capital cost estimating algorithm, which they must use in determining the capital cost of their recommended designs. (e) The students work in either three or four member teams and learn by experience and by instruction how to manage team dynamics to complete the work in a timely fashion. (d) The students prepare power point presentations describing the results of their work for the week and present them to professors and TA's who critically evaluate both content and presentation. Written clarification memos for points arising from the presentation are also required. (g) Stress is placed on the concept of designing to minimize environmental footprint and good corporate stewardship in design. (f)", "courseNumber": "4630", "professor": ["Tobias Hanrath", "Kathleen Vaeth"], "description": "Students prepare a stage-gate feasibility study of a chemical product including market and economic analysis, patent search, environmental, regulatory, and safety issues. Students will review historic cases of product innovation in context of the underlying structure-property relationships and customer value propositions. Students will apply analytical tools to determine the feasibility of the product spanning from concept to early stage development. This information is used to develop an economic analysis of the product development and to provide an ultimate recommendation as to the viability of the project.\nStudents develop presentation and teamwork skills through weekly presentations of their work to date followed by a final presentation to a panel of internal and external appraisers.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Projects in Chemical Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4900", "professor": ["A. Anton"], "description": "Research or studies on special problems in chemical engineering.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Design and Testing of the Chemical Engineering Car", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4980", "professor": ["Abraham Stroock"], "description": "Research, design, and construct a small chemical-powered model car. Participate in team-oriented hands-on construction of a car powered with a chemical energy source that will carry a specified load a given distance and stop. The AIChE Student Chapter enters it in the AIChE Regional Conference to qualify and compete in the organization's national conference competition.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Senior Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4990", "professor": ["T. Michael Duncan"], "description": "Students attend seminars of their selection and write one-page summaries. Eligible seminars include all listings at \"Colloquia and Seminars in Physics and Related Fields,\" which includes the weekly seminars in, for example, Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, History and Ethics of Engineering, and Materials Science and Engineering.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "International Research Internship", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4998", "professor": ["Fengqi You"], "description": "Research or studies on special problems in chemical engineering for visiting international students.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "M.Eng. Professional Development", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5010", "professor": ["Alfred Center"], "description": "Course will cover a number of professional development topics.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Hydrocarbon Resources", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " A basic understanding of hydrocarbon geology. (a,c,e) A basic understanding of hydrocarbon exploration methodologies and reservoir characterization. (a,c,e) A basic understanding of hydrocarbon well drilling. (a,c,e) A basic understanding of surface processing of well fluid and how they are converted to transportable products. (a,c,e,h) An understanding of petroleum refining and the interaction between processing schemes and the profitable processing of different crude oils. (b,c,e,j) Outcome 6: An understanding of the petroleum supply chain (c,h,j)", "courseNumber": "5207", "professor": ["Alfred Center"], "description": "The discovery and development of petroleum resources and their subsequent transformation to transportation fuels. Topics include exploration and drilling techniques, reservoir engineering, conversion of well fluid to transportable crude oil and gas, extraction of natural gas liquids, and petroleum refining. Various processing scenarios for different crude oils will be modeled by refinery software.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Renewable Resources from Agriculture", "offered": "Spring (last third of semester).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5208", "professor": ["Samir Somaiya"], "description": "Maximizing the value of a renewable resource by control of inputs and final product use.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Principles of Biomolecular Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Learn how to apply core engineering concepts (kinetics, thermodynamics, transport phenomena) to understanding and engineering the function of living systems. Gain familiarity with primary literature in biomolecular engineering, and systems, synthetic and computation biology through quantitative deconstruction of fundamental problems in biotechnology.", "courseNumber": "5440", "professor": ["Matthew Paszek", "Jeffrey Varner"], "description": "This course will cover the physical principles required for understanding the molecular basis of life and its use in biotechnologies. Emphasis will be placed on deconstructing biological phenomena from a quantitative perspective of core engineering principles. Specific topics will include:\u00a0 thermodynamics and kinetics of gene expression and genetic circuitry, biophysical principles of molecular interaction, molecular mechanisms in the definition of cell state and differentiation, molecular modes of cellular communication, and biophysical considerations for multicellular life.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Design Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5650", "professor": ["Alfred Center", "Yong Joo"], "description": "Design study and economic evaluation of a chemical processing facility, alternative methods of manufacture, raw-material preparation, food processing, waste disposal, or some other aspect of chemical processing.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Petroleum Separations Plant Operations Simulator Training", "offered": "Fall, Spring (two weeks).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5750", "professor": ["Frank Lomax"], "description": "Exposition of design principles for components of Gas Oil Separation Facility. Hands on operation of industrial scale process simulator at Shell Robert Training Center &amp; Conference Center in Louisiana. Production of a performance report for the simulator at differing gas/water/oil ratios.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Electronic Materials", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5862", "professor": ["R. Van Dover"], "description": "Examines the electrical and optical properties of materials. Topics include the mechanism of electrical conduction in metals, semiconductors and insulators; tuning of electrical properties in semiconductors, charge transport across metal/semiconductor and semiconductor/semiconductor junctions, and the interaction of materials with light; semiconductor electronic devices; and the materials science of device fabrication. Applications in microelectronics, solar cells, electronics, and display technologies are discussed. Students will complete and present a review of a current issues in semiconductor device evolution.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Energy Seminar II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5880", "professor": ["Lynden Archer", "David Hammer", "K. Max Zhang"], "description": "Energy resources, their conversion to electricity or mechanical work, and the environmental consequences of the energy cycle are discussed by faculty members from several departments in the university and by outside experts. Topics include energy resources and economics; coal-based electricity generation; nuclear reactors; solar power; energy conservation by users; and air pollution control.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Medical and Industrial Biotechnology Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5990", "professor": ["Matthew DeLisa", "Yong Joo"], "description": "Students attend seminars of their selection and write one-page summaries. Eligible seminars include all listings that are related to medical and industrial biotechnology.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Projects in Chemical Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5999", "professor": ["Alfred Center", "Yong Joo"], "description": "Nonthesis research or studies on special problems in chemical engineering.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Polymeric Materials", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Learn about the synthesis of polymers, their properties, and their industrial applications. (a,e) Acquire knowledge of sources of raw materials, the applications and limitations of available polymers/plastics, their benefits and disadvantages. (h,j) Gain experience in working in teams and presenting a recent development of an engineering solution based on the development of new polymeric materials. (g, j)", "courseNumber": "6400", "professor": ["Christopher Alabi"], "description": "Covers chemistry and physics of the formation and characterization of polymers; principles of fabrication.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Aerosols and Colloids", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6440", "professor": ["Donald Koch"], "description": "Dynamics of micro-and nano-particles, which contain many molecules but are small enough that molecular effects are important. Topics include the formation and growth of particles; their transport, theological and phase behaviors; and their role in technologies including paints, foods, health-care products, drug delivery, composite materials and air pollution control.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Air Pollution Control", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Size pollution devices. (a, c, k) Evaluate options for meeting regulations. (a, c, e, k) Understand regulatory framework and basis for regulations. (h, j, k)", "courseNumber": "6610", "professor": ["Paul Steen"], "description": "Covers origin of air pollutants, U.S. Emission standards, dispersion equations; design of equipment for removal of particulate and gaseous pollutants formed in combustion and chemical processing.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Energy Policy Module", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " To provide a holistic view of the energy policies of governments and other public institutions. To understand, analyze and critique their underlying causes and objectives. To gain a better understanding of their social and economic impacts.", "courseNumber": "6642", "professor": ["Muqtadar Quraishi"], "description": "Analyzes the energy policies of public institutions for a range of energy resources. Reviews economic and political determinants of policy. Examines policies that affect/control: pricing mechanisms, energy mix, subsidies, energy conservation/efficiency and the environment. Analyzes their economic and social impacts. Examples drawn from a wide range of settings.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Energy Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Bottom-up understanding of and appreciation for all forms of complex energy systems and the technical/commercial factors affecting their performance. (a, b, c, d) Capacity to think intuitively about project economics, typical trade-offs and political factors. (e) Development of skills associated with working in teams and leading a significant number of teams of other engineers. (f, g)", "courseNumber": "6650", "professor": ["Muqtadar Quraishi"], "description": "Focuses on carrying out a technical and economic analysis of diverse and complex energy projects (renewable and non-renewable) using a task and team-based approach. Considers and analyzes all possible factors and assumptions which can determine and affect the value of a project both positively and negatively. Includes five practical back to back tasks.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Bioenergy and Biofuels Module", "offered": "Spring (one quarter of term).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6661", "professor": ["Jefferson Tester"], "description": "Energy technology module of CHEME 6660\u00a0 will introduce students to issues and challenges in utilizing biomass feedstocks to produce bioenergy, biofuels and/or other products. The focus will be on converting biomass feedstocks to bioenergy using a variety of thermochemical processes. Case study material will include biomass feedstock cultivation and harvesting, processing and conversion technologies, co-products, and environmental and economic impacts over their full life cycle. The course will culminate in a final project in which students will use Life Cycle Assessment to measure the energetic viability and environmental performance.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Solar Energy Module", "offered": "Spring (one quarter of term)(offered alternate years).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6662", "professor": ["Tobias Hanrath", "Jefferson Tester"], "description": "Energy technology module of CHEME 6660\u00a0provides a comprehensive overview of solar energy conversion technologies. Major themes range from fundamental (nuts and bolts) solid-state concepts and operating principles of photovoltaics to manufacturing of cells and modules, balance of system aspects, and perspectives on second- and third-generation photovoltaic technologies. The module also summarizes solar thermal power technologies including passive and active solar heating, concentrated solar power plants.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Geothermal Energy Module", "offered": "Spring (one quarter of term).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6663", "professor": ["Jefferson Tester"], "description": "Energy technology module of\u00a0CHEME 6660\u00a0focuses on the utilization of low-temperature geothermal energy: geothermal heat pumps, district heating systems for heating and cooling, hybrid geothermal systems and cogeneration applications. It also discusses shallow and deep geothermal reservoir thermal modeling. Technical economic and environmental aspects of large scale geothermal deployment will be covered.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Fossil Fuels Module", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6670", "professor": ["Jefferson Tester", "Michael Weill"], "description": "Energy technology module of\u00a0CHEME 6660\u00a0covering fossil fuels.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Industrial Big Data Analytics and Machine Learning", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6880", "professor": ["Fengqi You"], "description": "This course covers the basic concepts, models and algorithms of Bayesian learning, classification, regression, dimension reduction, clustering, density estimation, artificial neural networks, deep learning, and reinforcement learning. Application and methodology topics include process monitoring, fault diagnosis, preventive maintenance, root cause analysis, soft sensing, quality control, machine learning for process optimization, data-driven decision making under uncertainty, missing data imputation, data de-noising, and anomaly/outlier detection.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Chemical Kinetics and Transport", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7130", "professor": ["Nicholas Abbott", "Susan Daniel"], "description": "Topics include microscopic and macroscopic viewpoints; connections between phenomenological chemical kinetics and molecular reaction dynamics; reaction cross sections, potential energy surfaces, and dynamics of biomolecular collisions; molecular beam scattering; transition state theory. Unimolecular reaction dynamics; complex chemically reacting systems: reactor stability, multiple steady states, oscillations, and bifurcation; reactions in heterogeneous media; and free-radical mechanisms in combustion and pyrolysis.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Selected Topics in Biochemical Engineering", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7410", "professor": ["Matthew DeLisa"], "description": "Discussion of current topics and research in biochemical engineering for graduate students.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Principles of Molecular Simulation", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7740", "professor": ["Fernando Escobedo"], "description": "Introduction to molecular simulation methods, Molecular Dynamics and Monte Carlo. Understanding options for interatomic and intermolecular modeling and appropriate representation of materials.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Principles of Biomolecular Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Learn how to apply core engineering concepts (kinetics, thermodynamics, transport phenomena) to understanding and engineering the function of living systems. Gain familiarity with primary literature in biomolecular engineering, and systems, synthetic and computation biology through quantitative deconstruction of fundamental problems in biotechnology.", "courseNumber": "7770", "professor": ["Matthew Paszek", "Jeffrey Varner"], "description": "This course will cover the physical principles required for understanding the molecular basis of life and its use in biotechnologies. Emphasis will be placed on deconstructing biological phenomena from a quantitative perspective of core engineering principles. Specific topics will include:\u00a0 thermodynamics and kinetics of gene expression and genetic circuitry, biophysical principles of molecular interaction, molecular mechanisms in the definition of cell state and differentiation, molecular modes of cellular communication, and biophysical considerations for multicellular life.", "subject": "CHEME"}, {"courseTitle": "Chemical Engineering Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7900", "professor": ["Matthew Paszek"], "description": "General chemical engineering seminar.", "subject": "CHEME"}], "ENGRD": [{"courseTitle": "Statics and Mechanics of Solids", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to draw complete and correct free body diagrams. Apply the principle of equilibrium to calculate external and internal forces in simple, statically determinant mechanical systems, including simple shear and bending moment distributions. Understand the concepts of stress, strain, deformation and elasticity. Analyze the stress, strain and deformation in bars subject to axial, bending and torsional loads. Use the principles of elasticity and equilibrium to solve for stresses in simple statically\r\nindeterminate systems.", "courseNumber": "2020", "professor": ["Meredith Silberstein"], "description": "Covers principles of statics, force systems, and equilibrium in solid structures. Topics include: free body diagrams in two and three dimensions; frames; mechanics of deformable solids; stress and strain; axial force; shear force, bending moment, and torsion in bars and beams; thermal stress; pressure vessles; statically indeterminate problems; buckling and yielding.", "subject": "ENGRD"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Circuits for Electrical and Computer Engineers", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2100", "professor": ["Khurram Afridi", "Clifford Pollock"], "description": "This course is an introduction to electronic circuits. We start with the basic quantities used to characterize circuit operation (like current, voltage, and power) and then enforce several physical laws to form the basis of our approach to circuit analysis. Networks comprising passive circuit elements such as resistors, inductors, and capacitors will be examined under constant dc, transient, and sinusoidal steady-state conditions. Active components including transistors and Op-Amps will be introduced and used to build simple amplifiers and switching power converters. Many of these ideas will be unified mathematically through the use of Laplace transforms and associated transfer functions. In the lab part of the course, we will learn how to use modern instruments to test circuits, and explore the concepts from lecture applied to real circuits. Finally, we will develop some simple modeling software in MATLAB to numerically predict the results from analysis and experiment.", "subject": "ENGRD"}, {"courseTitle": "Object-Oriented Programming and Data Structures", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": " Be fluent in the use of recursion and object-oriented programming concepts (e.g. classes, objects, inheritance, and interfaces). Be able to design and implement nontrivial Java programs (roughly 1000 lines of code), starting from an English language specification. Understand graphical user interfaces (GUIs), as expressed in Java. Understand asymptotic complexity of algorithms and be able to analyze programs to determine their running times. Understand basic data structures taught in the course and be able to implement them and use them in programs.", "courseNumber": "2110", "professor": ["Michael Clarkson", "David Gries"], "description": "Intermediate programming in a high-level language and introduction to computer science. Topics include object-oriented programming (classes, objects, subclasses, types), graphical user interfaces, algorithm analysis (asymptotic complexity, big \"O\" notation), recursion, testing, program correctness (loop invariants), searching/sorting, data structures (lists, trees, stacks, queues, heaps, search trees, hash tables, graphs), graph algorithms. Java is the principal programming language.", "subject": "ENGRD"}, {"courseTitle": "Signals and Information", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Use phasors and spectra in analysis of complex exponentials and sinusoids. Use convolution, frequency response, and z and Fourier transforms to analyze input-output behavior of continuous-time and discrete-time LTI systems. Understand sampling, aliasing, and reconstruction in the time and frequency domains and analyze signals in time or frequency domain in a system composed of continuous-time and discrete-time components in addition to discrete-to-continuous and continuous-to-discrete converters. Use the  relationship of frequency response, time response, and system function singularities to design frequency selective filters and discrete-time and continuous-time LTI systems.", "courseNumber": "2220", "professor": ["Peter Doerschuk"], "description": "Introduction to signal processing. Topics include frequency-based representations: Fourier analysis and synthesis; discrete time linear systems: input/output relationships, filtering, spectral response; analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion; continuous time signals and linear time invariant systems: frequency response and continuous-time Fourier transform.", "subject": "ENGRD"}, {"courseTitle": "Digital Logic and Computer Organization", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand Boolean logic and state machines as theoretical foundations of digital systems. Be able to conceive, analyze, design, and build combinational and sequential digital logic solutions to everyday problems. Comprehend the basic structure and functionality of ROM and RAM memories. Understand the basic structure and functionality of central processing units, and build a simple one using FPGAs. Understand the structure and operation of memory hierarchies and input/output systems.", "courseNumber": "2300", "professor": ["Edward Suh"], "description": "This course provides an introduction to the design and implementation of digital circuits and microprocessors. Topics include transistor network design, Boolean algebra, combinational circuits, sequential circuits, finite state machine design, processor pipelines, and memory hierarchy. Design methodology using both discrete components and hardware description languages is covered in the laboratory portion of the course.", "subject": "ENGRD"}, {"courseTitle": "The Physics of Life", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " An introductory-level understanding of molecular biology. An understanding of the importance of basic physics, math and chemistry concepts to molecular biology. An understanding of the importance of physics/math/engineering in developing techniques to probe biological systems.", "courseNumber": "2520", "professor": ["Harold Craighead"], "description": "Introduces the physics of biological macromolecules (e.g., proteins, DNA, RNA) to students of the physical sciences or engineering who have little or no background in biology. The macromolecules are studied from three perspectives. First, the biological role or function of each class of macromolecules is considered. Second, a quantitative description of the physical interactions that determine the behavior ofthese systems is provided. Finally, techniques that are commonly used to probe these systems, with an emphasis on current research, are discussed.", "subject": "ENGRD"}, {"courseTitle": "Electronic Materials for the Information Age", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2620", "professor": ["R. Van Dover"], "description": "Examines the electrical and optical properties of materials. Topics include the mechanism of electrical conduction in metals, semiconductors and insulators; tuning of electrical properties in semiconductors, charge transport across metal/semiconductor and semiconductor/semiconductor junctions, and the interaction of materials with light; semiconductor electronic devices; and the materials science of device fabrication. Applications in microelectronics, solar cells, electronics, and display technologies are discussed.", "subject": "ENGRD"}, {"courseTitle": "Interfacing the Digital Domain with an Analog World", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": " Learn techniques for interfacing computers with engineering and scientific measurements. Extend programming skills to using I/O operations in C++, graphical programming, and \"virtual instrument\" concepts. Improve technical writing skills in various forms, progress reports, technical reports and rapid, brief communications.", "courseNumber": "2640", "professor": ["Jie Shan"], "description": "Students use a computer to control equipment and acquire measurements in an engineering or scientific laboratory. Topics include data types, analog-to-digital conversion, digital-to-analog conversion, digital in/out, counter/timers, serial communication protocols, error analysis, least-squared fitting, introductory Fourier analysis, electrical waveguides/transmission lines, stepper motors, and introductory optical microscopy. Laboratory activities include practice exercises, measurement of pulse reflections in a transmission line, and development of a laser scanning microscope system. Data analysis is performed primarily using MatLabTM and instrument interfacing is primarily using LabVIEWTM, but also C++. Students develop effective written communication skills in the context of science and engineering. They prepare progress reports, technical reports, and formal articles based on laboratory work.", "subject": "ENGRD"}, {"courseTitle": "Basic Engineering Probability and Statistics", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": " Understand the breadth of decision situations with uncertainty that arise in engineering, industry, and society. Develop the skills needed for extracting information from data in real-world decision situations. Learn methods of probability modeling and data analysis. Build familiarity with current software used for statistical inference and data analysis.", "courseNumber": "2700", "professor": ["Yudong Chen"], "description": "Gives students a working knowledge of basic probability and statistics and their application to engineering. Includes computer analysis of data and simulation. Topics include random variables, probability distributions, expectation, estimation, testing, experimental design, quality control, and regression.", "subject": "ENGRD"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Probability and Inference for Random Signals and Systems", "offered": "Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": " Become fluent in combinatorics and set manipulations so as to make probabilistic predictions\r\ninvolving discrete models. Learn to recognize random phenomena in ECE applications, select appropriate mathematical\r\nmodels for them, and solve those models by exploiting mathematical structure such as statistical independence. Understand the statements of key limit theorems and be able to apply those theorems to make\r\ndecisions in the presence of uncertainty. Formulate estimation and detection problems from described physical scenarios and compute\r\nthe optimal estimators/decision rules for those scenarios.", "courseNumber": "3100", "professor": ["David Delchamps"], "description": "Probability theory is a mathematical discipline that allows one to reason about uncertainty: it helps us to predict uncertain events, to make better decisions under uncertainty, and to design and build systems that must operate in uncertain environments. This course will serve as an introduction to the subject on the modeling and analysis of random phenomena and processes, including the basics of statistical inference in the presence of uncertainty. Topics include probability models, combinatorics, countable and uncountable sample spaces, discrete random variables, probability mass functions, continuous random variables, probability density functions, cumulative distribution functions, expectation and variance, independence and correlation, conditioning and Bayess rule, concentration inequalities, the multivariate Normal distribution, limit theorems (including the law of large numbers and the central limit theorem), Monte Carlo methods, random processes, and the basics of statistical inference. Applications to communications, networking, circuit design, computer engineering, finance, and voting will be discussed throughout the semester.", "subject": "ENGRD"}, {"courseTitle": "Engineering Computation", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Be familiar with standard numerical methods and statistical procedures for engineering computation and learn to synthesize from different methods in a specific engineering application. Learn how to compute, estimate and track errors associated with numerical computations. Have a working knowledge of higher-level programming languages widely used in engineering for numerical methods and graphics, in particular, MATLAB. Gain experience in teams. Learn how to develop sanity tests for one's computational results and how to report them in a clear and objective manner.", "courseNumber": "3200", "professor": ["Pete Diamessis"], "description": "Introduction to numerical methods, computational mathematics, and probability and statistics. Development of programming and graphics proficiency with MATLAB and spreadsheets. Topics include Taylor-series approximations, numerical errors, condition numbers, operation counts, convergence, and stability, probability distributions, hypothesis testing. Included are numerical methods for solving engineering problems that entail roots of functions, simultaneous linear equations, statistics, regression, interpolation, numerical differentiation and integration, and solution of ordinary and partial differential equations, including an introduction to finite difference methods. Applications are drawn from different areas of engineering. A group project uses these methods on a realistic engineering problem.", "subject": "ENGRD"}], "ECE": [{"courseTitle": "The Computing Technology Inside Your Smartphone", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1210", "professor": ["David Albonesi"], "description": "The organization of the computer system found within devices used in everyday living, such as smartphones and tablets.\u00a0Computer systems are presented in a bottom up fashion, from bits to digital logic,\u00a0computer organization, instruction sets, assembly language, and the connection to high-level languages.\u00a0Discussion of the computing engines found in smart phones, tablets, and wearables.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Circuits for Electrical and Computer Engineers", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2100", "professor": ["Khurram Afridi", "Clifford Pollock"], "description": "This course is an introduction to electronic circuits. We start with the basic quantities used to characterize circuit operation (like current, voltage, and power) and then enforce several physical laws to form the basis of our approach to circuit analysis. Networks comprising passive circuit elements such as resistors, inductors, and capacitors will be examined under constant dc, transient, and sinusoidal steady-state conditions. Active components including transistors and Op-Amps will be introduced and used to build simple amplifiers and switching power converters. Many of these ideas will be unified mathematically through the use of Laplace transforms and associated transfer functions. In the lab part of the course, we will learn how to use modern instruments to test circuits, and explore the concepts from lecture applied to real circuits. Finally, we will develop some simple modeling software in MATLAB to numerically predict the results from analysis and experiment.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Signals and Information", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Use phasors and spectra in analysis of complex exponentials and sinusoids. Use convolution, frequency response, and z and Fourier transforms to analyze input-output behavior of continuous-time and discrete-time LTI systems. Understand sampling, aliasing, and reconstruction in the time and frequency domains and analyze signals in time or frequency domain in a system composed of continuous-time and discrete-time components in addition to discrete-to-continuous and continuous-to-discrete converters. Use the  relationship of frequency response, time response, and system function singularities to design frequency selective filters and discrete-time and continuous-time LTI systems.", "courseNumber": "2200", "professor": ["Peter Doerschuk"], "description": "Introduction to signal processing. Topics include frequency-based representations: Fourier analysis and synthesis; discrete time linear systems: input/output relationships, filtering, spectral response; analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion; continuous time signals and linear time invariant systems: frequency response and continuous-time Fourier transform.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Digital Logic and Computer Organization", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand Boolean logic and state machines as theoretical foundations of digital systems. Be able to conceive, analyze, design, and build combinational and sequential digital logic solutions to everyday problems. Comprehend the basic structure and functionality of ROM and RAM memories. Understand the basic structure and functionality of central processing units, and build a simple one using FPGAs. Understand the structure and operation of memory hierarchies and input/output systems.", "courseNumber": "2300", "professor": ["Edward Suh"], "description": "This course provides an introduction to the design and implementation of digital circuits and microprocessors. Topics include transistor network design, Boolean algebra, combinational circuits, sequential circuits, finite state machine design, processor pipelines, and memory hierarchy. Design methodology using both discrete components and hardware description languages is covered in the laboratory portion of the course.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Probability and Inference for Random Signals and Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Become fluent in combinatorics and set manipulations so as to make probabilistic predictions\r\ninvolving discrete models. Learn to recognize random phenomena in ECE applications, select appropriate mathematical\r\nmodels for them, and solve those models by exploiting mathematical structure such as statistical independence. Understand the statements of key limit theorems and be able to apply those theorems to make\r\ndecisions in the presence of uncertainty. Formulate estimation and detection problems from described physical scenarios and compute\r\nthe optimal estimators/decision rules for those scenarios.", "courseNumber": "3100", "professor": ["David Delchamps"], "description": "Probability theory is a mathematical discipline that allows one to reason about uncertainty: it helps us to predict uncertain events, to make better decisions under uncertainty, and to design and build systems that must operate in uncertain environments. This course will serve as an introduction to the subject on the modeling and analysis of random phenomena and processes, including the basics of statistical inference in the presence of uncertainty. Topics include probability models, combinatorics, countable and uncountable sample spaces, discrete random variables, probability mass functions, continuous random variables, probability density functions, cumulative distribution functions, expectation and variance, independence and correlation, conditioning and Bayess rule, concentration inequalities, the multivariate Normal distribution, limit theorems (including the law of large numbers and the central limit theorem), Monte Carlo methods, random processes, and the basics of statistical inference. Applications to communications, networking, circuit design, computer engineering, finance, and voting will be discussed throughout the semester.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Embedded Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3140", "professor": ["Jose Martinez"], "description": "An introduction to the design of embedded systems, with an emphasis on understanding the interaction between hardware, software, and the physical world. Topics covered include assembly language programming, interrupts, I/O, concurrency management, scheduling, resource management, and real-time constraints.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Microelectronics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3150", "professor": ["James Shealy"], "description": "This is a comprehensive undergraduate level course on microelectronics. Topics covered include basic semiconductor physics, electrons and holes in semiconductors, electrical transport in semiconductors, PN junctions and diodes, photodetectors and solar cells, Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) capacitors, MOS field effect transistors (FETs), bipolar junction transistors (BJTs), large signal and small signal models of electronic devices, single stage amplifiers, multistage amplifiers, differential amplifiers, analog circuit analysis and design, high-frequency models of devices, high-frequency circuit analysis, digital logic and MOS logic devices, complimentary MOS (or CMOS) logic gates, fundamental trade-offs in high speed analog and digital circuit design. The coursework includes labs and a final project.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Ethical Issues in Engineering Practice", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand current conceptions of engineering ethics. Have an appreciation for philosophical/sociological models underlying analyses of engineering practice. Understand the implications of (2) for considerations of engineering ethics. Be versed in the historical and technical details of particular episodes in engineering (Space Shuttle Challenger, Columbia, Ford Pinto\u2026), current events (VW case, Tesla case\u2026), and emerging technologies (brain-machine interface, gene editing, intelligent autonomous systems\u2026). Be able to communicate in writing effective, compelling arguments supported by evidence.", "courseNumber": "3600", "professor": ["Park Doing"], "description": "Studies ethical issues involved in engineering practice. Explores the engineer's role in technical decision-making in organizations. Considers the engineer's relationship to the uses of technology in society, especially emerging technologies. Case studies covered include the Space Shuttle Challenger, the Space Shuttle Columbia, The\u00a0Macondo Well Blowout, The Ford Pinto Case, The VW Emissions scandal, the Tesla Automatic Driving accident, Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, Fukushima, and the Bhopal case, among others. Technology topics considered include brain-machine interface, human enhancement, genetic engineering, intelligent autonomous systems,\u00a0privacy and surveillance,\u00a0energy\u00a0technologies, and environmental issues, among others. Codes of ethics in engineering, ethical theory, philosophical models of knowledge production, and sociological models of human and technological agency are introduced to analyze these issues.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Physics of Semiconductors and Nanostructures", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Learn basic principles of solid state and semiconductor physics needed to understand modern electronic and photonic devices. Learn how engineering materials and structures at the nanoscale enables novel electronic and photonic properties for a wide variety of engineering applications. Learn the relationship between basic science and engineering applications.", "courseNumber": "4070", "professor": ["Debdeep Jena"], "description": "Covers basic solid state and semiconductor physics relevant for understanding electronic and optical devices. Topics include crystalline structures, bonding in atoms and solids, energy bands in solids, electron statistics and dynamics in energy bands, effective mass equation, carrier transport in solids, Boltzmann transport equation, semiconductor homo- and hetero-junctions, optical processes in semiconductors, electronic and optical properties of semiconductor nanostructures, semiconductor quantum wells, wires, and dots, electron transport in reduced dimensions, semiconductor lasers and optoelectronics, high-frequency response of electrons in solids and plasmons.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Autonomous Mobile Robots", "offered": null, "outcomes": " Students will understand and implement localization and mapping algorithms using different sensor modalities. Be able to generate a path and the motion for a robot moving around an area with obstacles. Understand and implement the concepts of different approaches for motion planning such as roadmaps, feedback control and sampling based methods. Be able to apply the tools learned in the class to physical robots.", "courseNumber": "4180", "professor": ["Hadas Kress-Gazit"], "description": "Creating robots capable of performing complex tasks autonomously requires one to address a variety of different challenges such as sensing, perception, control, planning, mechanical design, and interaction with humans. In recent years many advances have been made toward creating such systems, both in the research community (different robot challenges and competitions) and in industry (industrial, military, and domestic robots). This course gives an overview of the challenges and techniques used for creating autonomous mobile robots. Topics include sensing, localization, mapping, path planning, motion planning, obstacle and collision avoidance, and multi-robot control.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Digital Signal and Image Processing", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Be able to draw Fourier spectra in both discrete-time frequency and continuous-time frequency,\r\nwhile undergoing common operations such as filtering, upsampling, downsampling, A/D and D/A. Given a finite-duration, discrete-time signal, be able to estimate the discrete-time Fourier\r\nTransform and the original frequency content in the signal (e.g., the continuous-time Fourier\r\nTransform) and give bounds on the accuracy of the estimate. Given a continuous-time signal with certain frequency- and time-based characteristics, be able to design a (real-world, non-ideal) system to appropriately sample the signal such that desired characteristics are maintained to within given tolerances. Given a digital audio (1-d) or image (2-d) signal, be able to select an appropriate frequency-\r\nbased transform suitable for the desired or specified processing. Quickly prototype and debug signal processing algorithms using Matlab.", "courseNumber": "4250", "professor": ["Mert Sabuncu"], "description": "Introduces statistical signal processing. Signal representation and manipulation are covered via correlation and using the DFT/FFT to estimate other transforms; applications of these topics are then covered, including quantization, quantization effects in digital filters, multirate DSP, filter banks, delta-sigma modulation, power spectrum estimation, and introductions to Wiener and Kalman filtering and image processing.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Nanofabrication and Characterization of Electronics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4360", "professor": ["Huili Xing"], "description": "This course will give an introduction to modern nanofabrication technologies with emphasis on integrated circuits manufacturing. Thermal budget, scaling of geometry, pitch and registry and control of parametric yield will be used for integration guidelines. Physical principles and process modeling will be covered in lectures and labs will include a series of fabrication steps of lithography, metallization, plasma etching and annealing to produce semiconductor devices (Schottky diodes, pn junction diodes, MOS capacitors, and MOSFETs). Recent advances in nanofabrication will be briefly reviewed for their possible technology insertion and main integration challenges.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Nanofabrication and Characterization of Electronics Laboratory", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4361", "professor": ["Huili Xing"], "description": "This course provides an introduction to nanofabrication technologies with emphasis on Si-based integrated circuits manufacturing as well as modern electronics based on GaN, 2D materials etc. The lab, primarily taught in the Cornell Teaching Cleanroom, includes basic fabrication steps of lithography, metallization, plasma etching and annealing. A series of devices will be fabricated: solar cells, MOS capacitors and transistors, 2D transistors, GaN HEMTs and LEDs.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Photonics: Devices and Applications", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Be able to analytically calculate the allowed modes in different waveguides. Be able to numerically simulate wave propagation in waveguides. Be able to design, simulate and measure an integrated device and communicate the results effectively. Understand and be able to predict the effects of attenuations in fibers and waveguides and its implications on the wave propagation. Learn to predict radiation losses in different structures such as bends and couplers.", "courseNumber": "4370", "professor": ["Carl Poitras"], "description": "Physical principles of optical waveguides. Wave equation solutions to the mode structure in waveguides, numerical analysis, mode coupling, dispersion and bandwidth limitations, optical materials, photonic band gap structures. Project design of planar optical components.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Computer Networks and Telecommunications", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Knowledge and understanding of why the Internet and other prominent networks have their current architecture. Ability to understand and analyze basic important algorithms in the Internet, such as congestion control and shortest path routing. Be able to understand the challenges that come with wireless networks and the tradeoff of corresponding solutions. Understand the limitation of the current Internet best of effort architecture. Be able to perform related analysis and design.", "courseNumber": "4450", "professor": ["Stephen Wicker"], "description": "This is a basic course in networking with an emphasis on the Internet. Examples of topics include: the World Wide Web, Email and Peer to Peer networks, data transmission and data encoding, circuit vs. packet switching, local area network technology, routing and switching, congestion control, network security, wireless networks and multimedia. Though the emphasis will be on the Internet, application modules on 4G cellular, WiFi (802.11), and Bluetooth will be presented.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Power Systems and Market Operations", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4520", "professor": ["Hsiao-Dong Chiang"], "description": "Examines the operations of electric power systems, the smart grid, and electricity markets. Topics include modeling of power systems, power flow analysis, economic dispatch, optimal power flow, unit commitments, electricity markets, demand response, smart grid technology, and transactive energy.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Digital VLSI Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Be able to design large scale clocked systems. Understand and make trade-offs between design time, cost, speed, power, area, and complexity. Be able to use a set of tools representative of the design process. Be able to evaluate new proposed digital designs. Understand the state-of-the-art in modern VLSI practice.", "courseNumber": "4740", "professor": ["Christoph Studer"], "description": "Introduction to digital VLSI design. Topics include basic transistor physics, switching networks and transistors, combinational and sequential logic, latches, clocking strategies, domino logic, PLAs, memories, physical design, floor planning, CMOS scaling, and performance and power considerations, etc. Lecture and homework topics emphasize disciplined design, and include CMOS logic, layout, and timing; computer-aided design and analysis tools; and electrical and performance considerations.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Controlled Fusion: Principles and Technology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand the scientific basis for controlled fusion by both magnetic confinement and inertial confinement approaches, as well as the technological requirements for practical electric power generation by the controlled fusion process. Be able determine the energy release of any nuclear reaction or reaction chain using the mass-energy relationship, and be able to solve well-posed engineering problems in plasma physics as applied to controlled fusion using Maxwell's equations and the equations of motion of charged particles in electric and magnetic fields. Be able to solve well-posed engineering problems in energy generation by controlled fusion having to do with the properties of materials in the presence of neutron irradiation and other relevant processes. Understand the fundamental role played by energy in our society and in the developing world, the potential role fusion can play, and the reasons that it is potentially more attractive than fission-based electric power generation. Be able to determine the state-of-the-art of different aspects of fusion reactor design by independent study using books, journals, conference proceedings, reports on the web and personal communication with experts.", "courseNumber": "4840", "professor": ["David Hammer"], "description": "Introduction to the physical principles and various engineering aspects underlying power generation by controlled fusion. Topics include fuels and conditions required for fusion power and basic fusion-reactor concepts; fundamental aspects of plasma physics relevant to fusion plasmas and basic engineering problems for a fusion reactor; and an engineering analysis of proposed magnetic and/or inertial confinement fusion-reactor designs.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Radar Remote Sensing", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": " Appreciate the historical, scientific, and sociological impact of radar systems. Understand the reciprocity theorem and its profound consequences. Learn to evaluate antenna performance using analysis and numerical methods, including computer algebra. Be able to design antennas, radar systems, and remote sensing experiments for specific tasks. Learn to design waveforms and process signals produced by radars and other instruments.", "courseNumber": "4870", "professor": ["David Hysell"], "description": "Fundamentals of radar, antennas, and remote sensing. Exposes students to the principles underlying the analysis and design of antennas used for communication and for radar-related applications. Students also encounter both a mathematical and a practical description of how radars function, how their performance can be optimized for different applications, and how signals acquired by them can be processed. The objective is to familiarize students with a wide variety of radars rather than turn them into practicing radar engineers. Each topic is developed from basic principles so students with a wide variety of backgrounds are able to take the course. Emphasizes radar applications in geophysics, meteorology and atmospheric sciences, and astronomy and space sciences. Gives special attention to radar remote sensing of the Earth from spacecraft.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Principles of Neurophysiology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students should understand the contemporary experimental paradigms in modern neurophysiology and become technically competent with the extracellular and intracellular recording techniques used to explore nervous system physiology. Students should deepen their understanding of the ionic mechanisms underlying neuronal excitability and synaptic communication in the nervous system. Students should develop their skills in communicating scientific results effectively through written lab reports and oral presentations. Students should refine their critical reading skills of primary scientific literature. Students should refine their ability to develop testable hypotheses, and develop independent scientific thinking.", "courseNumber": "4910", "professor": ["Bruce Johnson"], "description": "Laboratory-oriented course designed to teach the concepts and tools of cellular neurophysiology through hands-on experience with extracellular and intracellular electrophysiological techniques, and computer acquisition and analysis of laboratory results. Students explore signal transmission in the nervous system by examining the cellular basis of resting and action potentials, and synaptic transmission\u00a0and optogenetic control of behavior and physiology. Lecture time is used to review nervous system physiology, introduce laboratory exercises, discuss lab results and primary research papers, and for presentation of additional experimental preparations and methods. Invertebrate preparations are used as model systems. BIONB4910 website", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "ECE Technical Writing", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4920", "professor": ["Bruce Land"], "description": "Technical writing aimed at having students write up their ECE projects in a formal fashion, with a view to publication. Projects may be existing, or may be created as part of the independent study, but the writing requirement will match the current College technical writing requirement.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering", "offered": "Offered on demand.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4950", "professor": ["Jayadev Acharya"], "description": "Seminar, special interest, or temporary course.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering", "offered": "Offered on demand.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4960", "professor": ["Edwin Kan"], "description": "Seminar, special interest, or temporary course.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Supervised Teaching Experience", "offered": "Offered on demand.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4980", "professor": ["Farhan Rana"], "description": "This course is designed to give qualified undergraduates experience through actual involvement in planning and teaching courses under the supervision of department faculty. Students cannot receive both pay and credit for the same hours of preparation and teaching.\u00a0 Enrollment is with permission of instructor only. One credit of ECE 4980 is equivalent to 5 weekly work hours, including both student contact hours and preparatory/other time.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "International Research Internship", "offered": "Offered on demand.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4990", "professor": ["Farhan Rana"], "description": "Seminar, special interest, or temporary course.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Electrical and Computer Engineering Group Projects", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4998", "professor": ["Bruce Land"], "description": "Group study, analysis, and, usually, experimental tests in connection with a special engineering project chosen by the students after consultation with the faculty member directing the project. New projects are added upon faculty request. Written progress reports are required. Students must submit a Group Project Form to the Student Services Office, 222 Phillips Hall.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Electrical and Computer Engineering Independent Projects", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4999", "professor": ["Mert Sabuncu"], "description": "Individual study or directed reading in connection with\u00a0a special engineering problem chosen by the student after consultation with the faculty member directing the project. An engineering report on the project is required. Students must make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor and submit an Independent Project Form to the Student Services Office, 223 Phillips Hall.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Neural Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5040", "professor": ["Mahsa Shoaran"], "description": "This course is a broad interdisciplinary introduction to the field of neural engineering. The goal is to offer students a hands-on experience to learn about circuits, devices, and algorithms for diagnosis and treatment of neurological disorders such as epilepsy, Parkinson's disease, etc. Topics include basic neural physiology, various methods to measure brain activity, practical aspects of electrical recording and related circuits, large-scale neural data acquisition and processing, feature analysis and classification, neuromodulation techniques for closed-loop control and therapeutic intervention, and discussion of emerging topics.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Analysis Behavior and Optimization", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5130", "professor": ["David Goldberg"], "description": "This is an advanced course in the application of the systems engineering process to the architecture design and operation of complex systems. Topics include techniques for design, simulation, optimization, and control of complex systems. Case studies and system simulations in diverse areas provide context for the application of these techniques.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Theory of Linear Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will have an ability to develop state space models of dynamic linear systems in continuous time and discrete time based on physics models, input/output models, or rudimentary input/output experimental data. An ability to determine whether a system is controllable or observable. An ability to design stable state observers using pole placement. An ability to design stable full-state feedback controllers and observer-based controllers using pole placement. An ability to analyze system stability using pole locations and using the Lyapunov equation.", "courseNumber": "5210", "professor": ["Adam Bojanczyk"], "description": "State-space and multi-input-multi-output linear systems in discrete and continuous time. The state transition matrix, the matrix exponential, and the Cayley-Hamilton theorem. Controllability, observability, stability, realization theory. At the level of Linear Systems by Kailath.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Intelligent Autonomous Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5242", "professor": ["Daniel Lee"], "description": "How can intelligent machines perceive, make decisions, and execute their plans in an uncertain, dynamic world? This course will cover algorithms for robotic perception, planning, and control with a focus on real-time adaptation and learning. Students should have prior experience with methods in signal processing and machine learning. Topics covered include probabilistic methods for scene segmentation, multimodal sensory integration, latent variable models for dynamical systems, path planning, and reinforcement learning for motor control.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Semiconductor Physics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5350", "professor": ["Sandip Tiwari"], "description": "Interactions of electrons, holes, phonons, photons and spin in semiconductors and other materials used in devices. Charge, heat and spin transport, direct and indirect recombination and emission processes, deep levels and interface effects, and their behavior in bulk and at nanoscale.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Bayesian Estimation and Learning", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will learn state of the art methods in Bayesian state estimation, parameter estimation and applications.", "courseNumber": "5412", "professor": ["Vikram Krishnamurthy"], "description": "Course covering Bayesian inference for stochastic systems, parameter estimation and Bayesian networks. Includes optimal Bayesian filtering including Kalman filter, Hidden Markov model filter, sequential Monte-Carlo (particle) filters; maximum likelihood parameter estimation including the EM algorithm; social learning models and inference; Bayesian networks and their applications. The course will emphasize applications in social systems/networks, sensing and communication systems.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Power Systems and Market Operations", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5520", "professor": ["Hsiao-Dong Chiang"], "description": "Examines the operations of electric power systems, the smart grid, and electricity markets. Topics include modeling of power systems, power flow analysis, economic dispatch, optimal power flow, unit commitments, electricity markets, demand response, smart grid technology, and transactive energy.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Analog VLSI Circuit Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5540", "professor": ["Alyosha Molnar"], "description": "Advanced analog integrated circuit and system design. Topics include integrated continuoustime filter design, translinear circuits and systems, dynamic analog techniques, integrated discrete-time filter design, and Nyquist-rate data converter design.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Fundamentals of Data Compression", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5620", "professor": ["Aaron Wagner"], "description": "Fundamental limits and practical algorithms for data compression. Entropy and other information measures. Variable and \ufb01xed-length lossless and lossy source codes. Universal compression. Single-source and network con\ufb01gurations. Applications to text and multimedia compression.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Parallel Computing", "offered": "Spring (not offered every year).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5720", "professor": ["Adam Bojanczyk"], "description": "Course covers introduction to parallel computing in disciplines where parallel computing is required either to solve problems in real time, perform large scale simulations, or analyze big data sets. The course will present essential approaches to parallel solutions for shared memory, distributed memory, and hybrid environments. Students will be expected to design, implement and evaluate application programs using OpenMP, MPI and NVIDIA CUDA systems.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Design with Embedded Operating Systems", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5725", "professor": ["Joseph Skovira"], "description": "Design of microcontroller based systems using embedded Linux. Student teams design and debug example solutions on a target microcontroller (for example, Raspberry Pi) during lab sessions. Emphasis will be on application and Linux programming skills, processor and microcontroller architecture with some discussion of hardware interfaces. Students create a final, end-ofsemester project using the microcontroller platform and development techniques discussed during the semester.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Complex Digital ASIC Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5745", "professor": ["Christopher Batten"], "description": "Principles and practices involved in the design, implementation, testing, and evaluation of complex standard-cell ASIC chips using automated state-of-the-art CAD tools. Topics include hardware description languages; CMOS logic, state, and interconnect fundamentals; chip design methodologies; automated cell-based design; CAD algorithms; details of accurately modeling ASIC delay, energy, and area; robustness issues; testing, verification, and debugging; power distribution and clocking; packaging and I/O. Includes a six-week open ended project where small groups of students design, implement, test, and evaluate an interesting technique in computer architecture using functional-, microarchitectural-, registertransfer-, and layout-level modeling.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Microcontroller Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5760", "professor": ["Bruce Land"], "description": "Design of system-on-chip applications. Students working in pairs design, debug, and construct several systems that illustrate the design of embedded processors with custom peripherals running a real-time operating system. The content focuses on laboratory work. The lectures are used primarily for the introduction of examples, description of specific modules to be designed, and instruction in the hardware and high-level design tools to be employed.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Autonomous Mobile Robots", "offered": null, "outcomes": " Students will understand and implement localization and mapping algorithms using different sensor modalities. Be able to generate a path and the motion for a robot moving around an area with obstacles. Understand and implement the concepts of different approaches for motion planning such as roadmaps, feedback control and sampling based methods. Be able to apply the tools learned in the class to physical robots.", "courseNumber": "5772", "professor": ["Hadas Kress-Gazit"], "description": "Creating robots capable of performing complex tasks autonomously requires one to address a variety of different challenges such as sensing, perception, control, planning, mechanical design, and interaction with humans. In recent years many advances have been made toward creating such systems, both in the research community (different robot challenges and competitions) and in industry (industrial, military, and domestic robots). This course gives an overview of the challenges and techniques used for creating autonomous mobile robots. Topics include sensing, localization, mapping, path planning, motion planning, obstacle and collision avoidance, and multi-robot control.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Energy Seminar II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5880", "professor": ["Lynden Archer", "David Hammer", "K. Max Zhang"], "description": "Energy resources, their conversion to electricity or mechanical work, and the environmental consequences of the energy cycle are discussed by faculty members from several departments in the university and by outside experts. Topics include energy resources and economics; coal-based electricity generation; nuclear reactors; solar power; energy conservation by users; and air pollution control.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering", "offered": "Fall or Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5960", "professor": ["Amit Lal"], "description": "Seminar, special interest, or temporary course.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5970", "professor": ["Francesco Monticone"], "description": "Seminar, special interest, or temporary course.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering", "offered": "Offered on demand.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5990", "professor": ["Christina Delimitrou"], "description": "Seminar, special interest, or temporary course.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "MEng Technical Internship", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5999", "professor": ["Peter Jessel"], "description": "This course offers MENG students the opportunity to receive credit for ECE relevant work occurring as part of a summer (or semester) internship. Normally taken in the semester following the internship, students in the course will be required to write a detailed report describing the ECE related technical work performed during internship.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Master of Engineering Design Project II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6931", "professor": ["Jayadev Acharya"], "description": "Two-semester Design Project: must enroll in both semesters; receive R grade for first semester. For students enrolled in M.Eng. (Electrical and Computer Engineering) degree program. Uses real engineering situations to present fundamentals of engineering design. Each professor is assigned a section for the fall and spring. Students who do not complete the Design Project in the spring receive a grade only for the work completed up to the point of the required submission date, which is the last day of Finals Week. Students must then enroll for the summer with the ECE M.Eng. director to complete the work remaining for the design project.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Topics in ECE", "offered": "Offered on demand.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6970", "professor": ["Kirstin Petersen"], "description": "Seminar, special interest, or temporary course.", "subject": "ECE"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis Research", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7920", "professor": ["Jayadev Acharya"], "description": "For students enrolled in master's or doctoral program. Each professor is assigned a section number. To register, see roster for appropriate six-digit course ID numbers.", "subject": "ECE"}], "ENGRC": [{"courseTitle": "Technical Communication for Applied Engineering Physics", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2640", "professor": ["Rick Evans"], "description": "", "subject": "ENGRC"}, {"courseTitle": "Communication Intensive Opportunity: Practicum in Technical Writing", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3023", "professor": ["Rick Evans"], "description": "One-credit attachment to an existing engineering course that is not one of the officially designated W-I courses. It may be taken more than once, with different courses by permission of a particular engineering faculty member.", "subject": "ENGRC"}, {"courseTitle": "Communication for Game Development", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3152", "professor": ["Traci Nathans-Kelly"], "description": "", "subject": "ENGRC"}, {"courseTitle": "Independent Study in Engineering Communications", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3340", "professor": ["Rick Evans", "Traci Nathans-Kelly"], "description": "Members of the ECP occasionally give independent (also called \"directed\") studies in engineering communications, typically with students who are ready for advanced work in technical communication. A student doing a directed study works one-on-one with an ECP instructor to pursue an aspect of professional communications in more depth than is possible in the ECP's regular courses. Various types of projects are possible, e.g., studying forms of technical documentation, creating user manuals, analyzing and producing technical visuals, reading and writing about problems in engineering performance, and communicating about technical topics for the public.", "subject": "ENGRC"}, {"courseTitle": "Communications for Engineering Managers", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3350", "professor": ["Rick Evans"], "description": "ENGRC 3500\u00a0in that students write various types of documents (e.g., letters, memos, executive summaries, progress reports), give talks, and incorporate graphics in both their oral and written work. However, ENGRC 3350 focuses on understanding communication within engineering organizations and within student teams. Students work in project teams throughout the semester to write reports and deliver talks. The focus of the project teams depends on instructor, but might include analyzing case studies of engineering organizations, studying organizations on-site, and analyzing concepts in organizational communication and behavior.", "subject": "ENGRC"}, {"courseTitle": "Engineering Communications", "offered": "Fall, Winter, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3500", "professor": ["Traci Nathans-Kelly"], "description": "Prepares students for important communication activities. They communicate using various types of documents (e.g., emails, memos, problem analyses, proposals, progress reports), give oral presentations, and incorporate graphics in their oral and written work. Students learn how to communicate specialized information to different audiences (e.g., technical and nontechnical audiences, colleagues and clients, peers and supervisors, and in-house departments), work in teams, and address organizational and ethical issues. The course material is drawn from professional contexts, principally engineering, and it generates lively discussion. The class size ensures close attention to each student's work.", "subject": "ENGRC"}, {"courseTitle": "Communication for Transportation Engineering", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3610", "professor": ["Rick Evans"], "description": null, "subject": "ENGRC"}, {"courseTitle": "Communication for Advanced Game Development", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4152", "professor": ["Traci Nathans-Kelly"], "description": "", "subject": "ENGRC"}, {"courseTitle": "Communication for Computer-aided Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4530", "professor": ["Traci Nathans-Kelly"], "description": "", "subject": "ENGRC"}], "BME": [{"courseTitle": "Seeing Science in Action", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1110", "professor": ["Chris Schaffer"], "description": "The goal of this \"Learning Where You Live\" course is for students to see and understand the actual practice of scientific research. Too often science is taught as a collection of static facts in a book when science professionals think of it as a highly creative and collaborative process for discovery. Many students leave science degree programs before they even have a chance to see how science really \"works,\" let alone actually participate. In this course, students will be learning about and seeing cutting-edge research in modern laboratories. Critically, they will see what the practice of science is like. The course will have three modules, each centered on the lab of a different Cornell faculty member. First, there will be a lecture by the STEM faculty member on their research that is targeted to the freshmen audience and emphasizes the importance of work, its application, and the process of discovery and exploration that is intrinsic to the research. During the ~2 weeks following the lecture, students in the course will spend a one day shadowing graduate students and post-docs in the STEM faculty member's lab. Students will write a short description of what they saw and how it relates to the broader goals of the lab they learned about from the lecture. After all students have shadowed, there will be a second meeting that includes the students, and the scientists they shadowed, and the STEM faculty member. The focus of this second meeting will be discussing the experiments they saw, how they worked, how those measurements connect to the bigger picture goals for the laboratory and the project, as well as the nature of the relationships among the graduate students, post-docs, and faculty that enable this research. Finally, students will read and critically analyze a paper from the faculty member's lab, with a third and final meeting to discuss how this final scientific product relates to the people, experiments, and process of science they saw in the lab and discussed. These activities will give students incredible insight into how science is done and its inherent excitement.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Biomedical Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " To understand the underlying molecular, cellular, physiological and engineering that govern the field of biomedical engineering.", "courseNumber": "1310", "professor": ["Shivaun Archer", "Ashley Earle"], "description": "An introduction to the field of biomedical engineering with emphasis on application. Specific applications include biomechanics, bioimaging, bioinstrumentation, biotechnology/nanofabrication, artificial organs, cancer therapy and vaccines.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Physiology of Human Health and Disease", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2010", "professor": ["Shalu Suri"], "description": "Covers essentials of human physiology, with an overview of complementary mechanisms of homeostasis and disease pathogenesis. Topics presented in a modular format incorporating an overview of basic physiological mechanisms and key diseases of specific organ systems susceptible to alterations in that physiological mechanism. Topics include: filtration and renal function, electrophysiology and cardiac arrhythmia, neural transmission and muscular dystrophy, mineral balance and osteoporosis, and lipid transport and atherosclerosis. Course utilizes best pedagogical strategies including engaged learning practices, small group discussion, and lectures by clinicians working in these areas.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Experiential Learning Seminar", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2080", "professor": ["Jonathan Butcher", "Ryan Sauve"], "description": null, "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Biomolecular Thermodynamics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2110", "professor": ["Jan Lammerding"], "description": "This course serves as an introduction to thermodynamics and physical chemistry focused on the application to biomolecular systems. Topics include the role of entropy and free energy in determining biological reactions and processes such as enzymatic reactions or molecular interactions, protein folding/unfolding, single molecule mechanics, energy states, and equilibrium distribution of biomolecular and other systems.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Biomedical Signals and Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2310", "professor": ["Steven Adie"], "description": "Fundamentals of time- and frequency-domain methods to model biomedical signals and systems, within the context of biomedical instrumentation and imaging. Examples covered include the analysis of signals from a pulse oximeter, the reconstruction of ultrasound or MRI images, and the analysis of a control system for robotic surgery. Topics that are covered include the Fourier transform, linear systems, convolution, transfer function, filtering, sampling and aliasing, signal modulation and demodulation, Laplace transforms, circuits and control.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Molecular Principles of Biomedical Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3020", "professor": ["Rula Abbud-Antaki"], "description": "Genomic and proteomic thinking and tools have revolutionized the way scientists study biology and medicine. We are now beginning to understand the molecular level mechanisms that underlie normal and pathologic cellular functions. As a consequence, novel molecular level approaches provide the basis for better diagnostic and therapeutic strategies to effectively treat or prevent human diseases. This course aims to present a broad overview of molecular level techniques that are relevant in many aspects of biomedical engineering. We will discuss the underlying principles, how to interpret representative data, limitations of current approaches, and engineering challenges for the development of new and improved techniques.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Cellular Systems Biology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3110", "professor": ["Ben Cosgrove"], "description": "The behaviors of cells are increasing appreciated to be governed by a system of regulatory pathways, which processes information often in a multivariate, dynamic and non-linear fashion. The ability to reduce this complexity to predictable models is useful for designing new cancer therapies and genetically engineering cellular \"machines\". The course will cover: (1) analysis of dynamic control processes in cell biology, from intracellular pathways to networks to multicellular systems; (2) principles of computational systems biology, including genomic, proteomic, and transcriptomic algorithms; and (3) principles of synthetic biology, including gene circuit design and modeling. Students will learn to solve problems using computationally implemented algorithms and models, involving statistical methods, differential equation systems, multivariate regression, and logic-based approaches. This course is designed for upper-level undergraduate and Master's students in the biomedical, biological and/or engineering sciences.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Multiscale Biomaterial Analysis", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3210", "professor": ["David Putnam"], "description": "The course in advanced biomaterials leads the class through the process of material design and characterization for their development as products in the medical device or pharmaceutical fields. Student teams will apply their fundamental knowledge of chemistry and biology to open-ended design challenges focused on biomaterial mechanics, processability, biocompatibility and federal regulatory requirements. Hands-on technical work in materials characterization will be combined with key knowledge of biomaterials to give the class an integrated understanding of biomaterials design and development. Specific topics to be covered are classes of biomaterials, methods of characterization, the interface of biomaterials and biology, the foreign body response, inflammation, wound healing, biofilms, sterilization methods, FDA-approval guidelines and EU-approval guidelines.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Medical and Preclinical Imaging", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3310", "professor": ["Nozomi Nishimura"], "description": "This course teaches the fundamentals and applications of medical imaging techniques, including x-ray imaging and computed tomography, nuclear medicine, magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound, and optical imaging. Through lecture and demonstration labs, the class provides a rigorous introduction to medical imaging, beginning with the basic physical principles of image formation on to image reconstruction and descriptions and demonstrations of the hardware used in clinical applications. Concepts covered include resolution, point-spread-functions, modulation transfer functions, signal-to-noise, multi-dimensional Fourier transformation, image filtering in spatial domain and the structure and function of the human visual system.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Mechanobiology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3410", "professor": ["Jonathan Butcher"], "description": "This course analyzes how mechanical forces affect biological responses across biological scales, including molecular, cellular, tissue, organ, and organism level. Theoretical and empirical foundations and engineering approaches to applying, quantifying, and elucidating mechanobiological mechanisms across each scale will be presented. Applications in human health and disease pathogenesis will be emphasized.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Electrical and Chemical Physiology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4020", "professor": ["Iwijn De Vlaminck"], "description": "Focuses on understanding how circulating agents and bioelectric activity comprises interorgan and central nervous system communication, and control of the human body. Additional emphasis includes examining medical devices involved in the treatment of human disease.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Biomedical Engineering Design II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4090", "professor": ["James Antaki"], "description": "Substantial design experience based on the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier course work combined with the fundamental design theory articulated in BME 4080.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Science Policy Bootcamp: Concept to Conclusion", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4440", "professor": ["Chris Schaffer"], "description": "Science Policy Bootcamp: Concept to Conclusion, is an interdisciplinary service-learning course where students will explore the trends that shape science and innovation policy, understand core science policy concepts and engage in active policymaking work. This three-credit course will comprise of a three-hour long session that will meet every week. The first hour of each session will be devoted to broadening student's perspective on science policy. The following two hours will be spent working in groups on the primary activity of the course - a science policy advocacy project that builds over the full semester. Working in small groups, students will identify a key science policy issue. Together, they will thoroughly research the issue and contact key stakeholders, formulate a detailed plan to address the issue, and unique to this course - implement their plan for solving the problem toward the end of the semester. Examples may include drafting legislation, commenting on Federal or State rulemaking procedures, launching public outreach campaigns, or raising press awareness of an issue. This aspect of the course will include both mentored work in developing the idea and advocacy plan, as well as activities to build the skills necessary to be an effective policy advocate. Examples of such activities include mock press interviews and lobbying visits. As a result of the final project - students will have the unique opportunity to address a bona fide policy issue and create a working solution.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Orthopaedic Tissue Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will know and understand the function and physiology of bone, cartilage, tendon and ligament as organs and tissue. Apply strength of materials concepts to the mechanical behavior of musculoskeletal tissues and organs. Understand the unique adaptive capacity of musculoskeletal tissues to their mechanical environment. Integrate and interpret biological data and mechanical engineering concepts.", "courseNumber": "4640", "professor": ["Christopher Hernandez, Professor"], "description": "Application of mechanics and materials principles to orthopaedic tissues. Physiology of bone, cartilage, ligament, and tendon and the relationship of these properties to their mechanical function. Mechanical behavior of skeletal tissues. Functional adaptation of these tissues to their mechanical environment. Tissue engineering of replacement structures.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Independent Undergraduate Project in Biomedical Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4900", "professor": ["Michael Shuler"], "description": "Research or projects by an individual or a small group of undergraduates.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Honors Thesis", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4901", "professor": ["Jonathan Butcher"], "description": "Intended for students pursuing the research honors program in BME. This course is the culmination of the program's honors project requirement. Students enrolled in the BME Honors program will prepare an honors thesis based on the subject matter of a BME 4900\u00a0project from the previous semester, under the supervision of their research mentor.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Principles of Neurophysiology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students should understand the contemporary experimental paradigms in modern neurophysiology and become technically competent with the extracellular and intracellular recording techniques used to explore nervous system physiology. Students should deepen their understanding of the ionic mechanisms underlying neuronal excitability and synaptic communication in the nervous system. Students should develop their skills in communicating scientific results effectively through written lab reports and oral presentations. Students should refine their critical reading skills of primary scientific literature. Students should refine their ability to develop testable hypotheses, and develop independent scientific thinking.", "courseNumber": "4910", "professor": ["Bruce Johnson"], "description": "Laboratory-oriented course designed to teach the concepts and tools of cellular neurophysiology through hands-on experience with extracellular and intracellular electrophysiological techniques, and computer acquisition and analysis of laboratory results. Students explore signal transmission in the nervous system by examining the cellular basis of resting and action potentials, and synaptic transmission\u00a0and optogenetic control of behavior and physiology. Lecture time is used to review nervous system physiology, introduce laboratory exercises, discuss lab results and primary research papers, and for presentation of additional experimental preparations and methods. Invertebrate preparations are used as model systems. BIONB4910 website", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "HealthTech Hackathon", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4960", "professor": ["Ilana Brito"], "description": "This course, which focuses each year on a selected topic or theme within biomedical engineering, is designed to bring together a broad range of students in an experience learning opportunity that culminates in a weekend HealthTech hackathon. Extending over the first 4-6 weeks of the semester, students will form diverse teams with business students, engineers, computational biologists, and others to create solutions, products, or services around the current year's topic. Teams will develop solutions to real-world problems (e.g. halting the spread of antibiotic resistant bacteria), receiving feedback from mentors and performing initial analyses to assess both the potential and limitations of their solution. Prior to the hackathon weekend, the course will meet to discuss and reflect on preparatory reading, and to participate in skillbuilding sessions on scientific communication and effective teamwork. Following the event, students will synthesize their efforts into a final team report, further honing their scientific communication through problem statements and business plan development. Details of the topic for each year can be found at http://eship.cornell.edu/hackathons.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Teaching in Biomedical Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4970", "professor": ["Jonathan Butcher"], "description": "The student assists in teaching a biomedical engineering course appropriate to their previous training. The student may meet with a discussion or laboratory section, prepare course materials, grade assignments, and regularly discuss objectives and techniques with the faculty member in charge of the course.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Bioengineering Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5010", "professor": ["Newton de Faria", "Peter Doerschuk"], "description": "Students must attend and report on 10 self-selected seminars to fulfill the requirements of the course.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Neural Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5040", "professor": ["Mahsa Shoaran"], "description": "This course is a broad interdisciplinary introduction to the field of neural engineering. The goal is to offer students a hands-on experience to learn about circuits, devices, and algorithms for diagnosis and treatment of neurological disorders such as epilepsy, Parkinson's disease, etc. Topics include basic neural physiology, various methods to measure brain activity, practical aspects of electrical recording and related circuits, large-scale neural data acquisition and processing, feature analysis and classification, neuromodulation techniques for closed-loop control and therapeutic intervention, and discussion of emerging topics.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Clinical Preceptorship for Biomedical Engineers", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5100", "professor": ["Newton de Faria"], "description": "Preceptorship, is a well-known process in healthcare education and described as a short term relationship between a student as novice and an experienced health care professional, who provides individual attention to the student's learning needs within a clinical environment. The BME 5100 leverages this methodology and enable our students to experience the dynamics of a clinical environment, observe the routine practice of a clinician, identify potential needs, and through a formal process evaluate the merits and provide ideas on how to address these perceived needs. The instructor will educate the students about the clinical environment, dress and behavior code, interaction with hospital staff and patients, as well as monitor and manage each student-preceptor team. The instructor and other engineering faculty will also review the student's experiences and assist in any assignments the preceptor may have given to the student. The preceptor will guide the student with in depth knowledge of the related anatomy, physiology and pathology associated with his specialty. The preceptor will also provide the student the ability to participate and observe as well as generate weekly assignments. The sponsoring institution and the preceptors are very interested in the identified problems, the ideas resultant of the process, and how these ideas could be addressed by applying principles of engineering. The student will provide feedback in the form of a final report as well as an on-site poster presentation at the end of the academic year. The merited ideas will be placed in the pipeline for the sponsored design projects (BME 5910, BME 5920).", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Medical Device Regulatory Affairs for Biomedical Engineers", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5510", "professor": ["Newton de Faria"], "description": null, "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Cell-Biomaterials Interactions", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5830", "professor": ["Shalu Suri"], "description": "Biological principles underlying biomaterial design and cellular adhesive behavior, incorporating biomechanical analysis across the molecular, cellular and tissue length scales. We will take an in-depth look at design considerations and biomaterials analysis, incorporating reading from the primary literature as well as the text.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Preliminary Study for Design Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5910", "professor": ["Peter Doerschuk"], "description": "Design and economic evaluation of a biomedical engineering device or therapeutic strategy. Team projects are encouraged.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Industrial Projects: Preliminary Study for Design Project", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5911", "professor": ["Newton de Faria"], "description": null, "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Performance of Design Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5920", "professor": ["Peter Doerschuk"], "description": "Once a proposal for the project has been approved by the Sponsor or Faculty member, the student must (\"deliver on time and under budget\") produce a tangible work product.\u00a0Scheduling activities, ordering supplies, assembling, testing the device or procedure, and documenting the work and outcomes are the key expectation for the project.\u00a0", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Industrial Projects: Performance of Design Project", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5921", "professor": ["Newton de Faria"], "description": null, "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Independent Design Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5930", "professor": ["Peter Doerschuk"], "description": "Graduate-level, non-thesis research or studies on special projects in biomedical engineering.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Biomedical Engineering", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5950", "professor": ["Yadong Wang"], "description": null, "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Biomedical Engineering Research Seminar", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7020", "professor": ["Jan Lammerding"], "description": null, "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Student Teaching Experience", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7030", "professor": ["Jan Lammerding"], "description": "Guided individual experience in laboratory instruction and/or lectures/recitation instruction. Provides a preparatory teaching experience for graduate students considering an academic career.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Core Concepts in Disease", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7130", "professor": ["Ashley Earle"], "description": "Most diseases emerge due to a relative small number of biological effects, including mechanisms like infection, inflammation, neoplasia, genetic mutation, protein misfolding, and metabolic disregulation. Students learn about disease-state biology by focusing on these broad disease pathways. The course consists of several modules, each focused on one broad class of disease mechanism, and includes both a discussion of the underlying biology of the disease pathway as well as examples of specific diseases that involve those mechanisms. This course complements the training in fundamental normal-state biology students are already receiving by providing a mechanism-centered view of disease development.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Biomedical Engineering Graduate Colloquium", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7900", "professor": ["Steven Adie"], "description": "Research-based seminars. May meet with other seminar series as appropriate.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "M.S. Thesis Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8999", "professor": ["Jan Lammerding"], "description": "Thesis research for the M.S. degree in BME.", "subject": "BME"}, {"courseTitle": "Ph.D. Thesis Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "9999", "professor": ["Jan Lammerding"], "description": "Thesis research for the Ph.D. degree in BME.", "subject": "BME"}], "ENGRI": [{"courseTitle": "Engineering Applications of Operations Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand the breadth of quantitative decision situations that arise in engineering, industry, and society. Develop the skills needed for mathematical modeling of real-world decision situations. Learn fundamental algorithms used to solve such models and the basic mathematical techniques of validating the accuracy and efficiency of these solution methods. Build familiarity with current software used in the computational analysis of these models.", "courseNumber": "1101", "professor": ["Brenda Dietrich"], "description": "Introduction to the problems and methods of operations research and information engineering focusing on problem areas (including inventory, network design, and resource allocation), the situations in which these problems arise, and several standard solution techniques. In the computational laboratory, students encounter problem simulations and use some standard commercial software packages.", "subject": "ENGRI"}, {"courseTitle": "Sustainable Engineering of Energy, Water, Soil, and Air Resources", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to describe key scientific, economic, and social issues associated with sustainable management of energy, water, soil, and air resources. Students will be able to explain how infrastructure and regulatory systems influence sustainable resource use. Students will be able to identify appropriate technical engineering approaches to address management questions, and to apply basic versions of these techniques to specific problems.", "courseNumber": "1130", "professor": ["Scott Maguffin"], "description": "Course introduces concepts and tools required for the sustainable management of energy, water, soil, and air resources in our modern society.\u00a0 Semester is organized into four modules, each concentrating on one resource area and including a case study of local or regional significance.\u00a0 Students work in teams to address sustainability problems that arise in the case studies.\u00a0 Each module also includes presentations of technical approaches used in environmental engineering analyses. Project teams will be expected to apply those methods in their case study evaluations and management proposals. Technical approaches include life cycle analysis, mass balance computations, and mathematical modeling of pollutant dynamics in the environment.", "subject": "ENGRI"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Nanoscience and Nanoengineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " An introductory understanding of quantum mechanics and optics as applied to nanoscience and nanotechnology. Acquired a basic understanding of the tools and fabrication techniques used in nanoscience and nanotechnology.", "courseNumber": "1200", "professor": ["Guillaume Lambert"], "description": "Lecture/laboratory course designed to introduce first-year students to some of the ideas and concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology. Topics include nanoscience and nanotechnology-what they are and why they are of interest; atoms and molecules; the solid state; surfaces; behavior of light and material particles when confined to nanoscale dimensions; scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) design; basic micromachining and chemical synthesis methods, i.e., \"top-down\" and \"bottom-up\" approaches to nanofabrication; how to manipulate structures on the nanoscale; physical laws and limits they place on the nanoworld; some far-out ideas. In the laboratory, students use an AFM to record atomic resolution images, use a MEMS computer-aided design software package to model the entire manufacturing sequence of a simple MEMS device, examine the simulated behavior of the device and compare it with real behavior, construct a simple STM and learn through hands on experience the basic workings of the device.", "subject": "ENGRI"}, {"courseTitle": "The Computing Technology Inside Your Smartphone", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1210", "professor": ["David Albonesi"], "description": "The organization of the computer system found within devices used in everyday living, such as smartphones and tablets.\u00a0Computer systems are presented in a bottom up fashion, from bits to digital logic,\u00a0computer organization, instruction sets, assembly language, and the connection to high-level languages.\u00a0Discussion of the computing engines found in smart phones, tablets, and wearables.", "subject": "ENGRI"}, {"courseTitle": "Earthquake!", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand the impact of natural hazards on society and its infrastructure. Be able to analyze and interpret geological and geophysical datasets in the context of their role in hazard assessment.", "courseNumber": "1220", "professor": ["Larry Brown"], "description": "Explores the science of natural hazards, their societal impacts, and means of mitigation. The focus is on earthquakes, volcanoes, and tsunami, but hurricanes, severe weather, climate change, landslides, wildfires, and the threat of extinction from a future impact by an extraterrestrial body are also considered.", "subject": "ENGRI"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Biomedical Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " To understand the underlying molecular, cellular, physiological and engineering that govern the field of biomedical engineering.", "courseNumber": "1310", "professor": ["Shivaun Archer", "Ashley Earle"], "description": "An introduction to the field of biomedical engineering with emphasis on application. Specific applications include biomechanics, bioimaging, bioinstrumentation, biotechnology/nanofabrication, artificial organs, cancer therapy and vaccines.", "subject": "ENGRI"}, {"courseTitle": "Modeling and Simulation of Real-World Scientific Problems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand \"corner stone\" skills of CSE, including modeling, code verification and validation, error analysis. Use and manipulate software packages to learn how science problems can be represented in computational programs. Be confident in their ability to use computers to solve scientific and engineering problems. Learn practical skills to improve their ability to lead a team, be a good teammate and communicate effectively.", "courseNumber": "1510", "professor": ["Nandini Ananth", "Perrine Pepiot"], "description": "Hands-on introduction to scientific modeling and numerical simulations relevant to computational science and engineering. Students will learn how real-world problems can be solved using models, algorithms, and statistical tools. The course is organized around a set of team-based scientific computing projects drawn from various engineering and life science fields, using actual research and/or industrial computational codes. Leveraging simplified and user-friendly software interfaces and tutorials, the course focuses on the inductive learning of key concepts and topics such as physical and computational model formulation, verification and validation, uncertainty analysis, post-processing and data mining, and a high-level introduction to high performance computing. The course culminates with a community-engaged project, in which students are introduced to the basics of engineering design and team management to develop and animate a scientific computing activity in collaboration with, and tailored for, the Sciencenter. \u00a0Future Science Leaders program for middle- and high-schoolers. No prior programming experience is necessary, and a high-school math level is assumed. Enthusiasm for computer-based activities and interest in community outreach is strongly recommended.", "subject": "ENGRI"}], "ORIE": [{"courseTitle": "Data Science for All", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1380", "professor": ["James Booth", "Andrew Wilson"], "description": "For description, see CS 1380.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Practical Tools for Operations Research, Machine Learning and Data Science", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3120", "professor": ["Peter Frazier"], "description": "The practical use of software tools and mathematical methods from operations research, machine learning, statistics and data science. Software tools include structured query language (SQL), geographical information systems (GIS), Excel and Visual Basic programming (VBA), and programming in a scripting language (either R or Python). Operations research methods include inventory management, discrete event simulation, and an introduction to the analysis of queuing systems. Machine learning and statistical methods include multiple linear regression, classification, logistic regression, clustering, time-series forecasting, and the design and analysis of A/B tests. These topics will be presented in the context of business applications from transportation, manufacturing, retail, and e-commerce.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Optimization II", "offered": "Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3310", "professor": ["David Williamson"], "description": "A variety of optimization methods stressing extensions of linear programming and its applications but also including topics drawn from integer programming, dynamic programming, and network optimization. Formulation and modeling are stressed as well as numerous applications.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Engineering Stochastic Processes I", "offered": "Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3510", "professor": ["Gennady Samorodnitsky"], "description": "Uses basic concepts and techniques of random processes to construct models for a variety of problems of practical interest. Topics include the Poisson process, Markov chains, renewal theory, models for queuing, and reliability.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Information Systems and Analysis", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3800", "professor": ["Christina Yu"], "description": "Covers the foundations of information systems and analysis. The main focus is on understanding the value of information and its use in large-scale systems. The course covers economics, valuation, decision making, and strategic aspects of information as well as methods for analyzing and aggregating information.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Service System Modeling and Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4130", "professor": ["Jamol Pender"], "description": "Service systems arise primarily from the service sector of the economy. Examples are contact centers (also known as call centers), airlines, insurance and healthcare. This course describes techniques that are useful in the analysis and design of such systems. The class is structured around a number of cases. The emphasis is on modeling, solving the models, and interpreting the results. Both operational and strategic decisions are covered through appropriate examples.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Entrepreneurship for Engineers", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to read and understand private equity term sheets and analyze businesses from financial and strategic perspectives. Be able to provide written and oral communications in a business setting and work on a team. Understand market forces, pricing, competition, the nature of the process of entrepreneurship, and operational aspects of starting new technology-based businesses. Be familiar with the common forms of intellectual property protection. Appreciate the ethical issues that are found in entrepreneurial activities.", "courseNumber": "4152", "professor": ["John Richard Callister"], "description": "Develops skills necessary to identify, evaluate, and begin new business ventures. Topics include intellectual property, competition, strategy, business plans, technology forecasting, finance and accounting, and sources of capital. A rigorous, quantitative approach is stressed throughout, and students create financial documents and plans, analyze human resource models, and work with sophisticated valuation methods, complicated equity structures, and legal and business documents. As such, this course represents the \"red meat\" of entrepreneurship, and the soft skills are left for other courses. Course work consists of discussions, assignments, and the preparation and presentation of a complete business plan.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Game Theory", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4350", "professor": ["Krishnamurthy Iyer"], "description": "Broad survey of the mathematical theory of games, including such topics as two-person matrix and bimatrix games; cooperative and noncooperative n-person games; and games in extensive, normal, and characteristic function form. Economic market games. Applications to weighted voting and cost allocation.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Financial Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4600", "professor": ["John Richard Callister"], "description": "This is an introduction to the most important notions and ideas in modern financial engineering, such as arbitrage, pricing, derivatives, options, interest rate models, risk measures, equivalent martingale measures, complete and incomplete markets, etc. Most of the time the course deals with discrete time models.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Operations Research Tools for Financial Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4630", "professor": ["Thomas Diciccio"], "description": "Introduction to the applications of OR techniques, e.g., probability, statistics, and optimization, to finance and financial engineering. The course reviews probability and statistics and\u00a0surveys assets returns, ARIMA time series models, portfolio selection using quadratic programming, regression, CAPM and factor models, option pricing, GARCH models, fixed-income securities, and resampling techniques. Covers the use of R for statistical calculations, simulation,\u00a0and optimization.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Spreadsheet-Based Modeling and Data Analysis", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4820", "professor": ["Kathryn Caggiano"], "description": "Students develop and implement practical spreadsheet models to analyze data and evaluate decision problems in a hands-on learning environment. Microsoft Excel is heavily used. A wide variety of application areas are covered that incorporate concepts from probability, statistics, and constrained optimization.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Teaching in ORIE", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4990", "professor": ["Brenda Dietrich"], "description": "Involves working as a TA in an ORIE course. The instructor assigns credits (the guideline is 1 credit per four hours per week of work with a limit of 3 credits).", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "ORIE Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4999", "professor": ["Kathryn Caggiano"], "description": "Project-type work, under faculty supervision, on a real problem existing in some firm or institution. Opportunities in the course may be discussed with the associate director.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Principles of Supply Chain Management", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5126", "professor": ["Eric Gentsch", "John Muckstadt"], "description": "Supply chain management focuses on the flow of products, information, and money through organizations that constitute the supply chain. The course provides an overview of the key principles on which an effective supply chain should be constructed. These principles are presented and illustrated through a collection of cases. These cases are taught using an experiential learning model. Additionally, applications of analytic and simulation tools to the design and operation of supply chains are given.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "e-Logistics", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5129", "professor": ["Huseyin Topaloglu"], "description": null, "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Service System Modeling and Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5130", "professor": ["Jamol Pender"], "description": "Service systems arise primarily from the service sector of the economy. Examples are contact centers\u00a0(also known as call centers), airlines, insurance and healthcare. This course describes techniques that are useful in the analysis and design of such systems. The class is structured around a number of cases. The emphasis is on modeling, solving the models, and interpreting the results. Both operational and strategic decisions are covered through appropriate examples.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Service Systems and Online Markets", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5132", "professor": ["Itai Gurvich"], "description": "This course covers online and physical service systems with a focus on designing and managing them. When designing service systems, we need to determine the sales channels to use when offering services, design incentive mechanisms and make tactical capacity decisions. When operating service systems, we need to make rea-time pricing decisions, allocate capacity between different needs, make product recommendations, and forecast demand and customer behavior. Depending on the application setting, the capacity we manage can be physical, such as seats on an airplane to be allocated to passengers with different willingness to pay amounts, or digital, such as visitors on a webpage to be allocated between advertisers. We will cover ideas from revenue management, experimentation for demand learning, auctions, mechanism design and network theory.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Networks and Markets", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5138", "professor": ["Rafael Pass"], "description": "The course examines how the computing, economic and sociological worlds are connected and how these connections affects these worlds. Tools from computer science, game theory and mathematics are introduced and then used to analyze network structures present in everyday life. Topics covered include social networks, web search, auctions, markets, voting, and crypto-currencies (e.g. bitcoin).", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Analysis Behavior and Optimization", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5142", "professor": ["David Goldberg"], "description": "This is an advanced course in the application of the systems engineering process to the architecture design and operation of complex systems. Topics include techniques for design, simulation, optimization, and control of complex systems. Case studies and system simulations in diverse areas provide context for the application of these techniques.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Selected Topics in Applied ORIE", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5191", "professor": ["H. Oliver Gao"], "description": "Current topics dealing with applications of operations research.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Big Data Technologies", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5270", "professor": ["Lijun Ding", "Benjamin Grimmer"], "description": "This course offers a broad overview of computational techniques and mathematical skills that are useful for data scientists. The course is designed as a \"boot camp\" to offer students an intensive immersion into the subject over a short period of time. The topics include: unix shell, version control: Git, iPython, creating web APIs, data structures and algorithms, working with databases, exploratory data analysis: using Python and related libraries to explore data sets (pandas, bokeh), Map-Reduce, Spark, Hadoop, overview of some machine learning and optimization algorithms (logit regression, Poisson regression, k-means, neural networks, stochastic gradient descent, gradient descent, lbfgs), Python libraries for data analysis (scikit-learn, pytorch, SciPy, numpy), parallel computing, unit testing, IEEE 754 (Infinity, NaN, rounding error, overflow and underflow).", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Optimization II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5310", "professor": ["David Williamson"], "description": "A variety of optimization methods stressing extensions of linear programming and its applications but also including topics drawn from integer programming, dynamic programming, and network optimization. Formulation and modeling are stressed as well as numerous applications.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Optimization Modeling in Finance", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5370", "professor": ["James Renegar"], "description": "Explores optimization in the context of finance, including methodologies beyond linear programming, such as second-order cone programming and semidefinite programming.\u00a0 Topics include Markowitz portfolio theory and modeling; factor models for portfolio selection and risk control; the Black-Litterman model (and related Bayesian topics); utility functions; coherent risk measures; stochastic programming; and optimal execution of portfolio transactions.\u00a0 Emphasis is on concepts that are directly implementable.\u00a0 Homework and projects require considerable coding in MATLAB.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Engineering Stochastic Processes I", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5510", "professor": ["Gennady Samorodnitsky"], "description": "Uses basic concepts and techniques of random processes to construct models for a variety of problems of practical interest. Topics include the Poisson process, Markov chains, renewal theory, models for queuing, and reliability.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Applied Time Series Analysis", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5550", "professor": ["Maryclare Griffin"], "description": "Introduces statistical tools for the analysis of time-dependent data. Data analysis and application will be an integral part of this course. Topics include linear, nonlinear, seasonal, multivariate modeling, and financial time series.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Monte Carlo Methods in Financial Engineering", "offered": "Spring (weeks 8-14).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5582", "professor": ["David Eckman"], "description": "An overview of Monte Carlo methods as they apply in financial engineering. Generating sample paths. Variance reduction (including quasi random number), discretization, and sensitivities. Applications to derivative pricing and risk management.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Statistics for Financial Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5640", "professor": ["David Ruppert"], "description": "Regression, ARIMA, GARCH, stochastic volatility, and factor models. Calibration of financial engineering models, estimation of diffusion models, estimation of risk measures, multivariate models and copulas, bayesian statistics. Students are instructed in the use of R software; prior knowledge of R is helpful but not required. This course is intended for M.Eng. students in financial engineering and assumes some familiarity with finance and financial engineering. Students not in the financial engineering program are welcome if they have a suitable background. Students with no background in finance should consider taking ORIE 4630\u00a0instead.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Quantitative Methods of Financial Risk Management", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5650", "professor": ["Marie Chazal"], "description": "A historical perspective of market risk measurement including the Markowitz, CAPM and APT models and of insurance risk management, a description of the Value-at-Risk approach and an overview of VaR variants and extensions such as delta-VaR, CVaR and more generally distorsion risk measures, and a description of the qualitative approach of risk management by different companies. The course surveys methods for evaluating risk and consider multivariate methods for evaluating portfolios requiring copula tools which have become popular. Topics in credit risk: methods for determining default probabilities and company ratings based on financial ratios, and approaches to measuring credit risk which can be roughly divided into structural models and reduced-form models; first to default products and impact of correlation. Topics in insurance: pensions and life insurance, property and casualty insurance. Topics in finance: correlation of extremes, Herd index and systemic risk. Topics for environmental risks: flood risk, hurricane risk, weather derivatives and cat-bonds. Topics in energy: extremes and nuclear risk, energy supply issues, river network dam management. Regulations aspects (Basel II-III for banks and Solvency II for the insurance industry) and internal risk models for banks and insurance companies. Issues about concrete implementation of extreme value theory for regulation. Introduction to economic capital and economic capital allocation, and to competition issues in insurance and between old and new energies. Case studies and concrete examples of quantitative risk management issues and applications to financial, insurance, energy and environmental sectors. Participation of Chief Risk Officers of some companies to one or two sessions.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Learning and Decision Making", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5751", "professor": ["Nathan Kallus"], "description": "This course covers the analysis of data for making decisions with applications to electronic commerce, AI and intelligent agents, business analytics, and personalized medicine. The focus will be on learning good and automated decision policies, inferring causal effects of potential decisions, and interactive and intelligent systems that learn through acting and act to learn. Topics include A/B testing, sequential decision making and bandits, decision theory, risk minimization and generalization, Markov decision processes, reinforcement learning, analysis of observational data, instrumental variable analysis, and algorithmic fairness of personalized decision policies. Students are expected to have taken a first course in machine learning and have working knowledge of calculus, probability, and linear algebra as well as a modern scripting language such as Python.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Manufacturing Option Project", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5911", "professor": ["John Richard Callister"], "description": "Project course coordinated by Center for Manufacturing Enterprise.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Engineering Project", "offered": "Multi-semester course (Fall, Spring).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5940", "professor": ["Kathryn Caggiano"], "description": "Substantial, group-based design project that has a strong systems design component. The project must be approved by an ASE 1 instructor before the student enrolls in the course. (The following projects are preapproved: FSAE, HEV, Robocup, Brain.) A formal report is required.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Applied ORIE and IT Project", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5981", "professor": ["Krishnamurthy Iyer"], "description": "Identification, analysis, design, and evaluation of feasible solutions to some applied problem in the ORIE field.\u00a0 A formation report and oral defense of the approach and solution are required.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Computational Methods in Operations Research", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6125", "professor": ["Lijun Ding", "Benjamin Grimmer"], "description": "A suite of tools and techniques that enable computation in operations research. Structured and efficient programming, code optimization, code review, version management systems, building a user interface, exploring and manipulating large-scale datasets.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "The Design of Online Marketplaces", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6180", "professor": ["Sid Banerjee"], "description": "New online marketplaces are profoundly altering our social and economic interactions. They enable unprecedented levels of monitoring and control over their participants; the complexity of their underlying functions results in the platforms and their participants interacting in intricate and subtle ways; finally, many online marketplaces are reaching scales where small design changes can have a huge impact on their performance. In this course, we will: (i) look at several important online marketplaces, and highlight their unique economic and operational challenges, and (ii) develop stochastic models that provide a principled way to reason about their operations.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Applied Stochastic Processes", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6500", "professor": ["Qiaomin Xie"], "description": "Introduction to stochastic processes that presents the basic theory together with a variety of applications. Topics include Markov processes, renewal theory, random walks, branching processes, Brownian motion, stationary processes, martingales, and point processes.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Probability", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6510", "professor": ["Pierre Patie"], "description": "Covers sample spaces, events, sigma fields, probability measures, set induction, independence, random variables, expectation, review of important distributions and transformation techniques, convergence concepts, laws of large numbers and asymptotic normality, and conditioning.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Approximate Dynamic Programming", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6590", "professor": ["Andreea MINCA"], "description": "This course develops theories and algorithms for optimal sequential decision making under uncertainty. The emphasis will be on approximate algorithms to deal with large-scale decision models that can be highly uncertain. Various bounding techniques in recent literature will be covered. The course will intersect with traditional topics such as Markov decision processes, reinforcement learning, and bandit problems.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Selected Topics in Applied Operations Research", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7191", "professor": ["Madeleine Udell"], "description": "Current research topics dealing with applications of operations research.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Selected Topics in Mathematical Programming", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7391", "professor": ["Damek Davis"], "description": "Current research topics in mathematical programming.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Investigations", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7900", "professor": ["Gennady Samorodnitsky"], "description": "For individuals or small groups. Study of special topics or problems.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "PhD Independent Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7999", "professor": ["Gennady Samorodnitsky"], "description": "Independent research for ORIE Ph.D. students.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "ORIE Graduate Colloquium", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "9000", "professor": ["Gennady Samorodnitsky"], "description": "Weekly one and one-half hour meeting devoted to presentations by distinguished visitors, by faculty members, and by advanced graduate students on topics of current research in the field of operations research.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "M.Eng. Professional Review", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "9110", "professor": ["Kathryn Caggiano"], "description": "An interactive course in which students present findings and share lessons from their summer internship experiences.", "subject": "ORIE"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "9999", "professor": ["Mark Lewis"], "description": "For individuals doing thesis research for master's or doctoral degrees.", "subject": "ORIE"}], "EAS": [{"courseTitle": "Earthquake!", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand the impact of natural hazards on society and its infrastructure. Be able to analyze and interpret geological and geophysical datasets in the context of their role in hazard assessment.", "courseNumber": "1220", "professor": ["Larry Brown"], "description": "Explores the science of natural hazards, their societal impacts, and means of mitigation. The focus is on earthquakes, volcanoes, and tsunami, but hurricanes, severe weather, climate change, landslides, wildfires, and the threat of extinction from a future impact by an extraterrestrial body are also considered.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introductory Weather Analysis and Forecasting", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1340", "professor": ["Mark Wysocki"], "description": "This course serves as an extension of the EAS 1330\u00a0first year major's lab. It provides opportunity for formal weather briefings, explores specific atmospheric storms (synoptic and mesoscale, including the climatology of each storm type), through assigned readings, map analysis, and weather discussions.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Environmental Physics", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Describe, identify and use the basic principles of physics associated with energy and mass budgets and transfers as applied to the Earth's natural and built environment. Discuss, assess and solve environmental physics problems, using a physics vocabulary and appropriately quantifying results.", "courseNumber": "1600", "professor": ["Mark Wysocki"], "description": "Fundamentals of radiation, thermodynamics, and mechanics will be introduced and used to understand energy and mass transfers in natural and built environments. Students will describe, identify and use basic principles of physics to discuss and assess renewable energy systems and solve environmental physics problems, using a physics vocabulary and appropriately quantifying results. The course is offered in the spring semester as a flipped class, meeting twice weekly. The course is offered in the fall semester as a web-based, online course and covers the same material.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Evolution of the Earth and Life", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1700", "professor": ["Robert Ross"], "description": "This class covers events and organisms in the history of the Earth and its life, especially those that commonly appear in popular media such as documentaries, books, and science journalism. The class is intended for students of any background interested in an introductory exploration of how the Earth and life came to look the way they do and the science by which we study the geological past. Learn about movements of the continents and implications for climate and life; coevolution of life and the atmosphere; climate change through geologic time; and major patterns of biological evolution, including dinosaur diversification, mass extinctions, and human evolution. The course includes assignments to visit the Museum of the Earth and geological sites around the Cornell campus.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Meteorological Observations and Instruments", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2500", "professor": ["Sara Pryor"], "description": "Covers methods and principles of atmospheric measurements and observations including in situ surface, free-air, and remote systems. Students will gain practical experience in analysis of atmospheric data, and use of state-of-the-art instrumentation.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Climate and Global Warming", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2680", "professor": ["Arthur Degaetano"], "description": "Familiarizes students from a range of disciplines with such contemporary issues in climatology as global warming and El Ni\u00f1o. Introduces the natural greenhouse effect, past climates, and observed and projected climate changes and impacts. Also covers natural climate variations (e.g., El Ni\u00f1o) and their consequences and predictability. Readings focus on recent scientific findings related to climate change.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Computer Programming and Meteorology Software", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2900", "professor": ["Mark Wysocki"], "description": "Introduction to Python computer programming and visual software packages specifically tailored for meteorological application usage. Topics include basic Python programming (this includes problem analysis, algorithm development, and program writing and execution), data manipulation, and instruction in the use of GrADS, and GEMPACK visual display tools.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Interior of the Earth", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3040", "professor": ["Katie Keranen"], "description": "Investigates the geology of the solid earth with emphasis on igneous and metamorphic petrology, structure of the continents and ocean basins, and large-scale tectonics. Interaction between deformation, melt generation, and metamorphism is examined as mechanisms by which the crust is differentiated from the underlying mantle. Geophysical and geochemical techniques for probing the deep interior of the earth are investigated. Plate tectonics is used as a unifying theme to understand processes operating in the solid earth.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Geomorphology", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": " Students will be able to derive the fundamental equations that govern how various processes shape a planetary surface, and then apply that knowledge to real landscapes, both on Earth and across the solar system. Students will be able to understand the processes that shape planetary surfaces well enough to determine the dominant surface process that shapes a surface, either in the field or with remote sensing data. Students will be able to discuss how a given surface feature may evolve (across multiple scales) and understand the fundamental questions that remain to be addressed. Students will be able to analyze thoroughly, and rigorously, models proposed in the scientific literature.", "courseNumber": "3150", "professor": ["Samuel Birch", "Alexander Hayes"], "description": "This course is focused on a subset of the processes that can modify a planetary surface, with an emphasis on exogenic (erosional/depositional) processes. \u00a0\u00a0", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Atmospheric Dynamics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3420", "professor": ["Peter Hitchcock"], "description": "Introduction to the basic equations and techniques used to understand motion in the atmosphere, with an emphasis on the space and time scales typical of storm systems (the synoptic scale). Derives the governing equations of atmospheric flow from first principles and applies them to middle latitude and tropical meteorology. Topics include balanced flow, atmospheric waves, circulation, and vorticity.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Conservation Oceanography", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3510", "professor": ["Charles Greene", "Drew Harvell"], "description": "Focuses on field methods used to study marine organisms and ecosystems in efforts to sustain them in the face of many environmental challenges. Introduces students to modern techniques of marine-ecosystems research, including bioacoustics, ecological survey methods, and experimental marine ecology. This course is field and laboratory intensive with students engaged in hands-on, active learning that takes advantage of local resources.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Synoptic Meteorology I", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3520", "professor": ["Mark Wysocki"], "description": "Study of weather map analysis and forecasting techniques by applying the principles of fluid and heat flow. Strengthens previously introduced meteorological concepts that are applied to forecasting midlatitude synoptic scale weather systems, such as cyclones, anticyclones, jet streams, fronts, and waves.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Physical Oceanography", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3530", "professor": ["Bruce Monger"], "description": "Covers thermohaline and wind-driven circulation and surface-ocean boundary-layer dynamics. Mathematical expressions for describing conservation of momentum, mass, and heat in a fluid are used to explain the ocean's responses to wind and buoyancy forcing.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Biological Oceanography and Ocean Biogeochemistry", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3555", "professor": ["Ian Hewson"], "description": "The purpose of this course is to provide junior- and senior-level students with a background in biological oceanography and biogeochemistry of ocean systems. The format of the course is based on the relative abundance and biomass of marine organisms. Because unicellular organisms comprise the majority of living carbon in the ocean, and are essential to both elemental cycles and ecosystem function, the course will focus on bacteria, viruses, and phytoplankton in the ocean, and their roles in marine food webs. The course will also cover higher trophic levels (plants through cetaceans), especially their interactions with lower trophic levels in both food webs and as pathogens. Finally, the course will address nutrient and microbial pollution in context of a changing climate. This course will equip students with foundations for further courses in ocean sciences and environmental dynamics.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Community Wind Energy Research", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand scientific/engineering /environmental issues in developing/operating a wind farm. Understand the fundamentals of operation and deployment of atmospheric, acoustic and environmental measurements. Demonstrate an ability to select and use the techniques and engineering tools necessary to design a project to address their research goals. Be able to analyze and present their data as a technical report describing their project and make clear and effective technical presentations andto scientific and general audiences.", "courseNumber": "4120", "professor": ["Rebecca Barthelmie"], "description": "This is a project based design course. Students will be instructed in the tools and techniques used in planning and developing wind farms and then will work in teams building their own projects focused on an aspect of data collection (atmospheric, environmental, acoustic, wind turbine) and/or analysis at a local wind farm or wind energy facility. Community engagement can also involve developing/presenting education materials. Projects can include developing and deploying new sensors, modeling and data comparison, deploying existing instrumentation in a new configuration or for a particular campaign. The projects must be of utility to the wind farm and /or the surrounding community. All students engage in a 2-4 person wind farm design project.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Structural Geology", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4260", "professor": ["Richard Allmendinger"], "description": "The nature and origin of deformed rocks at submicroscopic to global scales. The course begins with review of elementary principles of continuum mechanics and continues with a discussion of deformation mechanisms commonly observed in earth materials. The geometry, kinematics, and mechanics of faults, folds, are then addressed and the class ends with a description of the tectonic setting of structural families such as thrust belts, rift provinces, and zones of strike slip deformation. A weekend field trip to a region of spectacular folding and thrusting provides an opportunity to apply the concepts learned in lecture.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Field Geophysics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4370", "professor": ["Larry Brown"], "description": "Fundamentals of subsurface imaging by geophysical methods as used in resource exploration and environmental investigations. Covers seismic, gravity, magnetics, resistivity, geodetic and ground-penetrating radar (GPR) techniques. Field exercises will allow students to collect such data near campus that is of local or regional societal relevance, analyze it, and communicate the results.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Volcanology", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4580", "professor": ["Esteban Gazel"], "description": "Volcanic\u00a0rocks constitute a significant component of the surface of all the terrestrial\u00a0planets. Volcanoes are the main location of mass and energy exchange\u00a0between the external and internal\u00a0parts of our planet,\u00a0making volcanic\u00a0processes key not only for the physical and chemical evolution of the planet,\u00a0but also to the evolution of climate and life. This course incorporates the physics\u00a0and\u00a0chemistry of magmatic processes related\u00a0to volcanic activity in several modules\u00a0followed by exercises done in class and complemented by\u00a0weekly assignments.\u00a0The goal\u00a0of this course is to enable students to\u00a0be able to: a) identify, describe\u00a0and\u00a0interpret the different volcanic deposits in the geologic record; b) interpret the physical\u00a0mechanisms by which magmas are produced, transport through the mantle and crust, and erupt at the\u00a0surface; c) understand the role of\u00a0volcanism in\u00a0planetary evolution; d)\u00a0evaluate the hazards and\u00a0risks to human populations and the environment\u00a0associated with volcanic\u00a0processes.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Weather Forecasting and Analysis", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4700", "professor": ["Mark Wysocki"], "description": "Applied course focusing on weather forecasting and analysis techniques for various regions around the world. Lectures emphasize the application of student's knowledge of atmospheric dynamics, thermodynamics, and computer-data analysis to forecast the development and movement of multiscale weather systems. Students participate in weekly forecast discussions; write daily forecasts that include a synoptic discussion, quantitative precipitation forecasts, and severe weather outlook for the forecast region; and lead class discussion on assigned readings.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Groundwater", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Application of mathematics, science, and engineering to real world groundwater problems. Knowledge of contemporary issues in world-wide fresh and clean water. Ability to use techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for environmental engineering practice.", "courseNumber": "4710", "professor": ["Tammo Steenhuis"], "description": "Fresh water has become a limited resource in many parts of the world. In arid and semi-arid regions, groundwater levels are declining at unstainable levels. In many industrial areas, groundwater is contaminated and unsuitable for drinking water. Sustainability and pollution will be addressed in this course; we will address these problem by first learning the theory of saturated flow and contaminant transport under ideal conditions. Subsequently, you will learn how to simplify a complex groundwater system so solutions can be found. At the end of the course, we will put conceptual, analytical and simulation models, in the broader context of past, current, and potential future groundwater quantity and quality issues, as they are affected by natural or human actions. Throughout the course, guest speakers will discuss topics of current interest related to water. This elective course is intended for seniors and graduate students interested in sub surface water and solute transport applications to sustainable ground water use and prevention of \u00a0pollution. Well prepared juniors are welcome too.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Quantitative Data Analysis for the Geosciences", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4740", "professor": ["Geoffrey Abers"], "description": "Geoscientists cannot perform controlled experiments, and they study processes that occur over time and distance scales that cannot fit into a laboratory, leading to unusual data analysis problems. This course first covers basic statistical methods for handling and treating noisy data of this sort, then parameter estimation from incomplete and noisy measurements, then basics of time series analysis. Examples include spatial, temporal, sequential and directional problems derived from climate science, seismology, sedimentology, structural geology, geochemistry and related fields.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Oceanography", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4750", "professor": ["Charles Greene"], "description": "Undergraduate instruction and participation in advanced areas of oceanographic research. Topics change from semester to semester. Contact instructor for further information.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Sedimentary Basins", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4760", "professor": ["Teresa Jordan"], "description": "Explores the large-scale physical characteristics of sedimentary basins, which host groundwater, oil and gas. Principles of the mechanics that control subsidence, tectonic causes of basins, and analysis methods are treated.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Paleobiology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4790", "professor": ["Warren Allmon"], "description": "Surveys the major groups of invertebrate organisms and their evolutionary histories, and the theoretical and practical principles of paleontology, from biostratigraphy to macroevolution. Intended to fill out the biological backgrounds of Earth and atmospheric science students concerning the nature and significance of the fossil record for their respective studies, and the paleontological backgrounds of biology students interested in ecology and evolution.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Tropical Meteorology and Climate", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": " Develop and apply numerical data analysis and visualization routines.", "courseNumber": "4860", "professor": ["Toby Ault"], "description": "This course will examine the atmospheric processes responsible for inducing variations in tropical weather and climate on daily to interannual timescales. Computer lab visualization and numerical modeling exercises will deepen student understanding of tropical meteorology, develop programming proficiency, and enhance scientific writing skills.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Radar Remote Sensing", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": " Appreciate the historical, scientific, and sociological impact of radar systems. Understand the reciprocity theorem and its profound consequences. Learn to evaluate antenna performance using analysis and numerical methods, including computer algebra. Be able to design antennas, radar systems, and remote sensing experiments for specific tasks. Learn to design waveforms and process signals produced by radars and other instruments.", "courseNumber": "4870", "professor": ["David Hysell"], "description": "Fundamentals of radar, antennas, and remote sensing. Exposes students to the principles underlying the analysis and design of antennas used for communication and for radar-related applications. Students also encounter both a mathematical and a practical description of how radars function, how their performance can be optimized for different applications, and how signals acquired by them can be processed. The objective is to familiarize students with a wide variety of radars rather than turn them into practicing radar engineers. Each topic is developed from basic principles so students with a wide variety of backgrounds are able to take the course. Emphasizes radar applications in geophysics, meteorology and atmospheric sciences, and astronomy and space sciences. Gives special attention to radar remote sensing of the Earth from spacecraft.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Research", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4920", "professor": ["Geoffrey Abers"], "description": "Introduction to the techniques and philosophy of research in the earth sciences and an opportunity for undergraduates to participate in current faculty research projects. Topics chosen in consultation with, and guided by, a faculty member. A short written report is required, and outstanding projects are prepared for publication.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Earth and Atmospheric Sciences (Undergraduate Level)", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4940", "professor": ["Natalie Mahowald"], "description": "The department teaches \"trial\" courses under this number. Offerings vary by semester and are advertised by the department before the beginning of the semester. The same course is not offered more than twice.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Internship Experience", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4960", "professor": ["Geoffrey Abers"], "description": "Students with internship opportunities may be able to receive credit through this course.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Individual Study in Atmospheric Science", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4970", "professor": ["Toby Ault"], "description": "Topics are arranged at the beginning of the semester for individual study or for group discussions.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Teaching Experience in Earth and Atmospheric Sciences", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4980", "professor": ["Geoffrey Abers"], "description": "The student assists in teaching an EAS course appropriate to his or her previous training. The student meets with a discussion or laboratory section, prepares course materials, grades assignments, and regularly discusses course objectives and teaching techniques with the faculty member in charge of the course.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Research in Atmospheric Science", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4990", "professor": ["Toby Ault"], "description": "Independent research on current problems in atmospheric science.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Master Engineering Design Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5000", "professor": ["Esteban Gazel"], "description": "Project with significant engineering content that is required for the M.Eng. program.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Numerical Techniques for Weather and Climate Modeling", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": " Students will be able to understand the theory, derivation, and application of numerical techniques used today for climate and weather modeling. Students will be able to explain how parameterization schemes are used and characterize their limitations. Students will be able to configure and run climate and weather simulations independently. Students will be able to modify underlying code to change model behavior.", "courseNumber": "5555", "professor": ["Toby Ault"], "description": "This class will present an introductory overview of the common methodological approaches used today for numerical weather prediction and global climate modeling. Technical skills and in-depth understanding of the approaches will be emphasized through short weekly reading assignments and programming activities. An historical perspective on weather and climate modeling will be covered as well in the scope of this course because it helps put state-of-the-art numerical modeling in an appropriate context. Final projects will include running a weather or climate model on the National Center for Atmospheric Research's Cheyenne supercomputer, or other supercomputing facilities if students have access to other resources they would like to use. Cloud computing based solutions to numerical weather and climate modeling will also be covered. \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Quantitative Data Analysis for the Geosciences", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5740", "professor": ["Geoffrey Abers"], "description": "Geoscientists cannot perform controlled experiments, and they study processes that occur over time and distance scales that cannot fit into a laboratory, leading to unusual data analysis problems. This course first covers basic statistical methods for handling and treating noisy data of this sort, then parameter estimation from incomplete and noisy measurements, then basics of time series analysis. Examples include spatial, temporal, sequential and directional problems derived from climate science, seismology, sedimentology, structural geology, geochemistry and related fields.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Tropical Meteorology and Climate", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": " Develop and apply numerical data analysis and visualization routines.", "courseNumber": "6860", "professor": ["Toby Ault"], "description": "This course will examine the atmospheric processes responsible for inducing variations in tropical weather and climate on daily to interannual timescales. Computer lab visualization and numerical modeling exercises will deepen student understanding of tropical meteorology, develop programming proficiency, and enhance scientific writing skills.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Earth and Atmospheric Sciences (Graduate Level)", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6920", "professor": ["Toby Ault", "Stephen Colucci"], "description": "Study of topics in earth and atmospheric science that are more specialized or different from other courses. Special topics depend on staff and student interests.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis Research", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7020", "professor": ["Geoffrey Abers"], "description": "Thesis research for geological sciences graduate students.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Upper Atmospheric and Space Physics", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7110", "professor": ["David Hysell"], "description": "Reading class for upper atmospheric physics.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Topics in Structural Geology", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7220", "professor": ["Richard Allmendinger"], "description": "Advanced work on original investigations in structural geology. Topics change from semester to semester. Contact the instructor for more information.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Current Research in Petrology and Geochemistry", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7570", "professor": ["Suzanne Kay"], "description": "Advanced work on original investigations in petrology and geochemistry. Topics change from semester to semester. Contact the instructor for more information.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Topics in Paleobiology", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7620", "professor": ["Warren Allmon"], "description": "Advanced work on original investigations in paleobiology. Topics change from semester to semester. Contact the instructor for more information.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Topics in Paleoecology", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7650", "professor": ["Gregory Dietl"], "description": "Advanced work on original investigations in paleoecology. Topics change from semester to semester. Contact the instructor for more information.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Topics in Sedimentology and Stratigraphy", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7710", "professor": ["Teresa Jordan"], "description": "Advanced readings on specific themes in sedimentology, stratigraphy, and sedimentary basins. Topics change from semester to semester and will be chosen in consultation between student and instructor.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Topics in Seismic Imaging", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7810", "professor": ["Larry Brown"], "description": "Exploration of advanced techniques for imaging the earth via readings and/or computer exercises.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Andes-Himalaya Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7930", "professor": ["Suzanne Kay"], "description": "Seminar course for graduate students in geological sciences with topics in tectonics, seismology, petrology, and similar disciplines. Emphasis on mountain belts, but other topics entertained.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Master's Level Thesis Research in Atmospheric Science", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8500", "professor": ["Toby Ault"], "description": "Thesis research for atmospheric science master's students.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate-Level Dissertation Research in Atmospheric Science", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "9500", "professor": ["Toby Ault"], "description": "Dissertation research for atmospheric science Ph.D. students only before \"A\" exam has been passed.", "subject": "EAS"}, {"courseTitle": "Doctoral-Level Dissertation Research in Atmospheric Science", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "9510", "professor": ["Toby Ault"], "description": "Dissertation research for atmospheric science Ph.D. students after \"A\" exam has been passed.", "subject": "EAS"}], "CS": [{"courseTitle": "Introduction to Computing Using Python", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": " Be fluent in the use of procedural statements -assignments, conditional statements, loops, method calls- and  arrays. Be able to design, code, and test small Python programs that meet requirements expressed in English. This includes a basic understanding of top-down design. Understand the concepts of object-oriented programming as used in Python: classes, subclasses, inheritance, and overriding. Have knowledge of basic searching and sorting algorithms. Have knowledge of the basics of vector computation.", "courseNumber": "1110", "professor": ["Anne Bracy"], "description": "Programming and problem solving using Python. Emphasizes principles of software development, style, and testing. Topics include procedures and functions, iteration, recusion, arrays and vectors, strings, an operational model of procedure and function calls, algorithms, exceptions, object-oriented programming, and GUIs (graphical user interfaces). Weekly labs provide guided practice on the computer, with staff present to help. Assignments use graphics and GUIs to help develop fluency and understanding.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Computing Using MATLAB", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Be fluent in the use of procedural statements-assignments, conditional statements, loops, function calls-and arrays. Be able to design, code, and test small MATLAB programs that meet requirements expressed in English. This includes a basic understanding of top-down design. Understand the concepts of object-oriented programming as used in MATLAB: classes, subclasses, inheritance, and overriding. Have knowledge of basic sorting and searching algorithms. Have a working familiarity with graphics tools in MATLAB.", "courseNumber": "1112", "professor": ["Kit-Yee Daisy Fan"], "description": "Programming and problem solving using MATLAB. Emphasizes the systematic development of algorithms and programs. Topics include iteration, functions, arrays, recursion, object-oriented programming, and MATLAB graphics. Assignments are designed to build an appreciation for complexity, dimension, fuzzy data, inexact arithmetic, randomness, simulation, and the role of approximation.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Short Course in MATLAB", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Students who take this course will understand the basic MATLAB constructs and be able to write simple programs.", "courseNumber": "1132", "professor": ["Kit-Yee Daisy Fan"], "description": "Introduction to the MATLAB programming language. Covers the basic programming constructs of MATLAB, including assignment, conditionals, iteration, functions, arrays, vectorized computation, and scientific graphics. Designed for students who need MATLAB for research or other courses. Does not assume any previous programming experience.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Short Course in Python", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Students who take this course will build an understanding the basic Python constructs and be able to write simple programs.", "courseNumber": "1133", "professor": ["Craig Frey"], "description": "Introduction to the Python programming language. Covers the basic programming constructs of Python, including assignment, conditionals, iteration, functions, object-oriented design, arrays, and vectorized computation. Designed for students who need Python for research or other courses. Does not assume any previous programming experience.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Data Science for All", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1380", "professor": ["James Booth", "Andrew Wilson"], "description": "For description, see CS 1380.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Cognitive Science", "offered": "Spring, Summer (six-week session).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1710", "professor": ["Khena Swallow"], "description": "This course provides an introduction to the science of the mind.\u00a0 Everyone knows what it's like to think and perceive, but this subjective experience provides little insight into how minds emerge from physical intities like brains.\u00a0 To address this issue, cognitive science integrates work from at least five disciplines: Psychology, Neuroscience, Computer Science, Linguistics, and Philosophy.\u00a0 This course introduces students to the insights these disciplines offer into the workings of the mind by exploring visual perception, attention, memory, learning, problem solving, language, and consciousness.\u00a0", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Freshmen and Nontechnical Team Projects", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1998", "professor": ["Walker White"], "description": "Freshmen and Nontechnical Team Projects.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "UNIX Tools and Scripting", "offered": "Spring (weeks 1-6).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2043", "professor": ["Matthew Milano"], "description": "UNIX and UNIX-like systems are increasingly being used on personal computers, mobile phones, web servers, and many other systems. They represent a wonderful family of programming environments useful both to computer scientists and to people in many other fields, such as computational biology and computational linguistics, in which data is naturally represented by strings. This course takes students from shell basics and piping, to regular-expression processing tools, to shell scripting and Python. Other topics to be covered include handling concurrent and remote resources, manipulating streams and files, and managing software installations.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Object-Oriented Programming and Data Structures", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": " Be fluent in the use of recursion and object-oriented programming concepts (e.g. classes, objects, inheritance, and interfaces). Be able to design and implement nontrivial Java programs (roughly 1000 lines of code), starting from an English language specification. Understand graphical user interfaces (GUIs), as expressed in Java. Understand asymptotic complexity of algorithms and be able to analyze programs to determine their running times. Understand basic data structures taught in the course and be able to implement them and use them in programs.", "courseNumber": "2110", "professor": ["Michael Clarkson", "David Gries"], "description": "Intermediate programming in a high-level language and introduction to computer science. Topics include object-oriented programming (classes, objects, subclasses, types), graphical user interfaces, algorithm analysis (asymptotic complexity, big \"O\" notation), recursion, testing, program correctness (loop invariants), searching/sorting, data structures (lists, trees, stacks, queues, heaps, search trees, hash tables, graphs), graph algorithms. Java is the principal programming language.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Programming Practicum", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2111", "professor": ["Michael Clarkson", "David Gries"], "description": "Meets weekly for one hour, in collaboration with CS 2110. Designed to enhance understanding of object-oriented programming, use of the application for writing Java programs, and other programming issues, as well as theoretical concepts that arise in CS 2110. The hour is spent in ways appropriate to the material under study -lecture, question-answer session, problem solving in small groups, one-on-one help, etc.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Intermediate Design and Programming for the Web", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2300", "professor": ["Kyle Harms"], "description": "Web programming requires the cooperation of two machines: the one in front of the viewer (client) and the one delivering the content (server).\u00a0INFO 1300\u00a0concentrates almost exclusively on the client side. The main emphasis in INFO 2300 is learning about server side processing. Students begin with a short overview of the PHP server-side scripting language, then look at interactions with databases, learning about querying via the database language SQL. Through a succession of projects, students learn how to apply this understanding to the creation of an interactive, data-driven site via PHP and the MYSQL database. Also considered are technologies such as Javascript and Ajax and techniques to enhance security and privacy. Design and usability issues are emphasized. A major component of the course is the creation of a substantial web site.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Excursions in Computational Sustainability", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to identify notions of sustainability as they arise in ecology, geology, economics, and other biological, physical, and social sciences. Students will be able to mathematically interpret and calculate levels of sustainability. Students will learn how to problem solve techniques of sustainability via computational models, algorithms, and statistical methods.", "courseNumber": "2770", "professor": ["Carla Gomes", "Bart Selman"], "description": "Balancing environmental, economic, and societal needs for a sustainable future encompasses problems of unprecedented size and complexity. Computing and information science can play an important role in addressing critical sustainability challenges faced by present and future generations. The goal of the course is to introduce students to a range of sustainability challenges and to computational methods that can help address such challenges. Sustainability topics include sustainable development, biodiversity and wildlife conservation, poverty mitigation, food security, renewable resources, energy, transportation, and climate change. In the context of these sustainability topics, the course will introduce students to mathematical and computational modeling techniques, algorithms, and statistical methods. The course is at the introductory undergraduate level. Students are expected to have basic knowledge of probability theory and calculus.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Discrete Structures", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2800", "professor": ["Michael George"], "description": "Covers the mathematics that underlies most of computer science. Topics include mathematical induction; logical proof; propositional and predicate calculus; combinatorics and discrete mathematics; some basic elements of basic probability theory; basic number theory; sets, functions, and relations; graphs; and finite-state machines. These topics are discussed in the context of applications to many areas of computer science, such as the RSA cryptosystem and web searching.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Discrete Structures - Honors", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2802", "professor": ["Joe Halpern"], "description": "Covers the mathematics that underlies most of computer science. Topics include mathematical induction; logical proof; propositional and predicate calculus; combinatorics and discrete mathematics; some basic elements of basic probability theory; basic number theory; sets, functions, and relations; graphs; and finite-state machines. These topics are discussed in the context of applications to many areas of computer science, such as the RSA cryptosystem and web searching.\u00a0\u00a0 This course is an honors version of CS 2800.\u00a0 It will cover essentially the same material, but go into more depth.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Data Structures and Functional Programming", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3110", "professor": ["Nate Foster"], "description": "Advanced programming course that emphasizes functional programming techniques and data structures. Programming topics include recursive and higher-order procedures, models of programming language evaluation and compilation, type systems, and polymorphism. Data structures and algorithms covered include graph algorithms, balanced trees, memory heaps, and garbage collection. Also covers techniques for analyzing program performance and correctness.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Computer Game Architecture", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3152", "professor": ["Walker White"], "description": "A project-based course in which programmers and designers collaborate to make a computer game. This course investigates the theory and practice of developing computer games from a blend of technical, aesthetic, and cultural perspectives. Technical aspects of game architecture include software engineering, artificial intelligence, game physics, computer graphics, and networking. Aesthetic and cultural include art and modeling, sound and music, game balance, and player experience.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Data-Driven Web Applications", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3300", "professor": ["Jeff Rzeszotarski"], "description": "This course will introduce students to working with data in the context of modern web applications. These include data representation with relational and non-relational databases, data mining to find patterns and make predictions, and graphical presentation for visualization.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Computer System Organization and Programming", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3410", "professor": ["Hakim Weatherspoon"], "description": "Introduction to computer organization, systems programming and the hardware/ software interface. Topics include instruction sets, computer arithmetic, datapath design, data formats, addressing modes, memory hierarchies including caches and virtual memory, I/O devices, bus-based I/O systems, and multicore architectures. Students learn assembly language programming and design a pipelined RISC processor.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Embedded Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3420", "professor": ["Jose Martinez"], "description": "An introduction to the design of embedded systems, with an emphasis on understanding the interaction between hardware, software, and the physical world. Topics covered include assembly language programming, interrupts, I/O, concurrency management, scheduling, resource management, and real-time constraints.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Autonomous Mobile Robots", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will understand and implement localization and mapping algorithms using different sensor modalities. Be able to generate a path and the motion for a robot moving around an area with obstacles. Understand and implement the concepts of different approaches for motion planning such as roadmaps, feedback control and sampling based methods. Be able to apply the tools learned in the class to physical robots.", "courseNumber": "3758", "professor": ["Hadas Kress-Gazit"], "description": "Creating robots capable of performing complex tasks autonomously requires one to address a variety of different challenges such as sensing, perception, control, planning, mechanical design, and interaction with humans. In recent years many advances have been made toward creating such systems, both in the research community (different robot challenges and competitions) and in industry (industrial, military, and domestic robots). This course gives an overview of the challenges and techniques used for creating autonomous mobile robots. Topics include sensing, localization, mapping, path planning, motion planning, obstacle and collision avoidance, and multi-robot control.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Teaching Experience in Computer Science", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4090", "professor": ["Dexter Kozen"], "description": "Earn course credit for working as a consultant or ugrad TA in a computer science course.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Compilers", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4120", "professor": ["Andrew Myers"], "description": "An introduction to the specification and implementation of modern compilers. Topics covered include lexical scanning, parsing, type checking, code generation and translation, an introduction to program analysis and optimization, and compile-time and run-time support for modern programming languages. As part of the course, students will build a working compiler for an object-oriented language.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Practicum in Compilers", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4121", "professor": ["Andrew Myers"], "description": "Students will build a working compiler for an object-oriented language.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Topics in Computer Game Architecture", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4152", "professor": ["Walker White"], "description": "Project-based follow-up course to CS 3152. Students work in a multidisciplinary team to develop a game that incorporates innovative game technology. Advanced topics include 3D game development, mobile platforms, multiplayer gaming, and nontraditional input devices. There is a special emphasis on developing games that can be submitted to festivals and competitions.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Formal Verification", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4160", "professor": ["Michael Clarkson"], "description": "An introduction to formal verification, focusing on correctness of functional and imperative programs relative to mathematical specifications. Topics include computer-assisted theorem proving, logic, programming language semantics, and verification of algorithms and data structures. Assignments involve extensive use of a proof assistant to develop and check proofs.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Numerical Analysis: Linear and Nonlinear Problems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4220", "professor": ["Anil Damle"], "description": "Introduction to the fundamentals of numerical linear algebra: direct and iterative methods for linear systems, eigenvalue problems, singular value decomposition. In the second half of the course, the above are used to build iterative methods for nonlinear systems and for multivariate optimization. Strong emphasis is placed on understanding the advantages, disadvantages, and limits of applicability for all the covered techniques. Computer programming is required to test the theoretical concepts throughout the course.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Language and Information", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4300", "professor": ["Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil"], "description": "How to make sense of the vast amounts of information available online, and how to relate it and to the social context in which it appears? This course introduces basic tools for retrieving and analyzing unstructured textual information from the web and social media. Applications include information retrieval (with human feedback),\u00a0sentiment analysis and social analysis of text. The coursework will include\u00a0programming projects that play on the interaction between knowledge and social factors.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Operating Systems", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4410", "professor": ["Lorenzo Alvisi"], "description": "Introduction to the design of systems programs, with emphasis on multiprogrammed operating systems. Topics include concurrency, synchronization, deadlocks, memory management, protection, input-output methods, networking, file systems and security. The impact of network and distributed computing environments on operating systems is also discussed.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Practicum in Operating Systems", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4411", "professor": ["Lorenzo Alvisi"], "description": "Studies the practical aspects of operating systems through the design and implementation of an operating system kernel that supports multiprogramming, virtual memory, and various input-output devices. All the programming for the project is in a high-level language.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Computer Networks", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4450", "professor": ["Rachit Agarwal"], "description": "This course introduces the basic architectural and design principles of computer networking including the design of communication protocols, congestion control, routing and switching, Internet, data center networks and wireless networks.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Computer Vision", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4670", "professor": ["Bharath Hariharan"], "description": "An in-depth introduction to computer vision. The goal of computer vision is to compute properties of our world-the 3D shape of an environment, the motion of objects, the names of people or things-through analysis of digital images or videos. \u00a0The course covers a range of topics, including 3D reconstruction, image segmentaion, object recognition, and vision algorithms fro the Internet, as well as key algorithmic, optimization, and machine learning techniques, such as graph cuts, non-linear least squares, and deep learning. \u00a0This course emphasizes hands-on experience with computer vision, and several large programming projects.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Foundations of Artificial Intelligence", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4700", "professor": ["Haym Hirsh"], "description": "Challenging introduction to the major subareas and current research directions in artificial intelligence. Topics include knowledge representation, heuristic search, problem solving, natural-language processing, game-playing, logic and deduction, planning, and machine learning.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Practicum in Artificial Intelligence", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4701", "professor": ["Haym Hirsh"], "description": "Project portion of CS 4700. Topics include knowledge representation systems, search procedures, game-playing, automated reasoning, concept learning, reinforcement learning, neural nets, genetics algorithms, planning, and truth maintenance.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Computational Linguistics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4744", "professor": ["Natalie DelBusso"], "description": "Computational models of natural languages. Topics include tree syntax and treebank databases; broad-coverage probabilistic grammars; finite state generative phonology; computational semantics; computational minimalist grammar; finite state optimality-theoretic phonology; Hidden Markov models of acoustic realization; text and speech corpora; lab methods in Unix/Linux environment.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Human Robot Interaction - Research and Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4754", "professor": ["Malte Jung"], "description": "This course provides an introduction into the design of and research on human robot interaction. Students will be working alone and in teams on designing and examining novel ways for robots to interact with people. In parallel to the design projects students will be introduced to current research on human-robot interaction. Topics include: Needfinding, interaction analysis, video prototyping, testing, and systematic evaluation.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Machine Learning for Data Science", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4786", "professor": ["Karthik Sridharan"], "description": "An introduction to machine learning for data-science applications. Topics include dimensionality-reduction (such as principal components analysis, canonical correlation analysis, and random projection); clustering (such as k-means and single-link); probabilistic modeling (such as mixture models and the EM algorithm).\u00a0", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Principles of Large-Scale Machine Learning Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4787", "professor": ["Christopher De Sa"], "description": "An introduction to the mathematical and algorithms design principles and tradeoffs that underlie large-scale machine learning on big training sets. Topics include: stochastic gradient descent and other scalable optimization methods, mini-batch training, accelerated methods, adaptive learning rates, parallel and distributed training, and quantization and model compression.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Analysis of Algorithms", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4820", "professor": ["Eshan Chattopadhyay", "Robert Kleinberg"], "description": "Develops techniques used in the design and analysis of algorithms, with an emphasis on problems arising in computing applications. Example applications are drawn from systems and networks, artificial intelligence, computer vision, data mining, and computational biology. This course covers four major algorithm design techniques (greedy algorithms, divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, and network flow), undecidability and NP-completeness, and algorithmic techniques for intractable problems (including identification of structured special cases , approximation algorithms, local search heuristics, and online algorithms).", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Mathematical Foundations for the Information Age", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4850", "professor": ["John Hopcroft"], "description": "Covers the mathematical foundations for access to information. Topics include high dimensional space, random graphs, singular value decomposition, Markov processes, learning theory, and algorithms for massive data.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Networks II: Market Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4852", "professor": ["Arpita Ghosh"], "description": "Networks II builds on its prerequisite course and continues to examine how each of the computing, economic, sociological and natural worlds are connected and how the structure of these connections affects these worlds. In this course, we will construct mathematical models for and analyze networked settings, allowing us to both make predictions about behavior in such systems, as well as reason about how to design such systems to exhibit some desirable behavior. Throughout, we will draw on real-world examples such as social networks, peer-to-peer filesharing, Internet markets, and crowdsourcing, that illustrate these phenomena.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "International Research Internship", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4990", "professor": [], "description": null, "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Team Projects", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4998", "professor": ["Kavita Bala"], "description": "Advanced independent work in computer science as part of a student-led team project.\u00a0", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Independent Reading and Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4999", "professor": ["William Arms"], "description": "Independent reading and research for undergraduates.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Compilers", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5120", "professor": ["Andrew Myers"], "description": "An introduction to the specification and implementation of modern compilers. Topics covered include lexical scanning, parsing, type checking, code generation and translation, an introduction to program analysis and optimization, and compile-time and run-time support for modern programming languages. As part of the course, students will build a working compiler for an object-oriented language.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Practicum in Compilers", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5121", "professor": ["Andrew Myers"], "description": "Students will build a working compiler for an object-oriented language.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Software Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5150", "professor": ["William Arms"], "description": "Introduction to the practical problems of specifying, designing, building, testing, and delivering reliable software systems. Special topics include professionalism, project management, and the legal framework for software development. As a central part of the course, student teams carry out projects for real clients, using concepts of agile software development. Each project includes all aspects of software development from a feasibility study to final delivery.\"", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Open-Source Software Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5152", "professor": ["Ross Tate"], "description": "Students will collaborate with mentors from industry to learn how to become a part of the open-source community and contribute to open-source projects, with students actively committing to open-source projects throughout the semester. Lectures, in addition to discussing open-source processes and tools, will teach students how to be proactive members of larger systems, such as teams, projects, companies, and society at large, by delving into topics from psychology, sociology, business, economics, gender studies, ethnic studies, writing, speaking, and ethics.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Competition Programming and Problem Solving Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5199", "professor": ["Robbert Van Renesse"], "description": "Seminar will focus on advanced algorithms and their implementations related to programming contests. Course will emphasize on problem-solving skills so students learn how those algorithms can be applied to solve abstract programming contest/technical interview problems. Every week the seminar will feature a presentation by either a faculty member or a student on related topics. Potential topics include: advanced data structures (i.e. union-find set, segment tree), advanced graph algorithms (i.e. connectivity algorithms), applied number theory and combinatorics, dynamic programming algorithms, stringology (i.e. Knuth\u2013Morris\u2013Pratt algorithm, suffix tree), computational geometry (i.e. convex hull, half-plane intersection), constructive algorithms, and exponential algorithms.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Data Science in the Wild", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5304", "professor": ["Eran Toch"], "description": "Massive amounts of data are collected by many companies and organizations and the task of a data scientist is to extract actionable knowledge from the data \u2013 for scientific needs, to improve public health, to promote businesses, for social studies and for various other purposes. This course will focus on the practical aspects of the field and will attempt to provide a comprehensive set of tools for extracting knowledge from data.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Cloud Computing", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5412", "professor": ["Ken Birman"], "description": "Focuses on cloud computing, large-scale Internet applications, and other practical issues in designing and implementing trustworthy, scalable distributed software.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "System Security", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5430", "professor": ["Fred Schneider"], "description": "Discusses security and survivability for computers and communications networks. Includes discussions of policy issues (e.g., the national debates on cryptography policy) as well as discussions of the technical alternatives for implementing the properties that comprise \"trustworthiness\" in a computing system. Covers mechanisms for authorization and authentication as well as cryptographic protocols.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Practicum in System Security", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5431", "professor": ["Fred Schneider"], "description": "Explores the design and construction of secure computing systems, including secure coding and the use of software analysis tools. Course involves the construction of a significant project group project.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Blockchains, Cryptocurrencies, and Smart Contracts", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5433", "professor": ["Ari Juels"], "description": "Viewed variously as a niche currency for online criminals and a technological threat to the financial industry, Bitcoin has fueled mythmaking, financial speculation, and real technological innovation. We will study both Bitcoin and the technological landscape it has inspired and catalyzed. Topics will include: the mechanics of consensus algorithms, such as Proof of Work and Byzantine Consensus, and their role in blockchains and cryptocurrencies; cryptographic tools employed in cryptocurrencies, including digital signatures algorithm and zero-knowledge proofs; the evolution and mechanics of Bitcoin and its ecosystem; smart contracts; and special topics, such as trusted hardware in blockchain-based systems, smart contracts and real-world contract law, and cryptocurrencies and crime. Grading will be based on homework assignments and a final project or exam.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Interactive Computer Graphics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5625", "professor": ["Stephen Marschner"], "description": "Methods for interactive computer graphics, targeting applications including games, visualization, design, and immersive environments. Introduces students to state-of-the-art interactive techniques and programmable shading. Students develop a game engine for their final project using Java and GLSL.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Computer Vision", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5670", "professor": ["Bharath Hariharan"], "description": "An in-depth introduction to computer vision. The goal of computer vision is to compute properties of our world-the 3D shape of an environment, the motion of objects, the names of people or things-through analysis of digital images or videos. \u00a0The course covers a range of topics, including 3D reconstruction, image segmentaion, object recognition, and vision algorithms fro the Internet, as well as key algorithmic, optimization, and machine learning techniques, such as graph cuts, non-linear least squares, and deep learning. \u00a0This course emphasizes hands-on experience with computer vision, and several large programming projects.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Learning and Decision Making", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5726", "professor": ["Nathan Kallus"], "description": "This course covers the analysis of data for making decisions with applications to electronic commerce, AI and intelligent agents, business analytics, and personalized medicine. The focus will be on learning good and automated decision policies, inferring causal effects of potential decisions, and interactive and intelligent systems that learn through acting and act to learn. Topics include A/B testing, sequential decision making and bandits, decision theory, risk minimization and generalization, Markov decision processes, reinforcement learning, analysis of observational data, instrumental variable analysis, and algorithmic fairness of personalized decision policies. Students are expected to have taken a first course in machine learning and have working knowledge of calculus, probability, and linear algebra as well as a modern scripting language such as Python.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Natural Language Processing", "offered": "Fall, Spring (NYC).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5740", "professor": ["Yoav Artzi"], "description": "This course constitutes an introduction to natural language processing (NLP), the goal of which is to enable computers to use human languages as input, output, or both. NLP is at the heart of many of today's most exciting technological achievements, including machine translation, automatic conversational assistants and Internet search. Possible topics include methods for handling underlying linguistic phenomena (e.g., syntactic analysis, word sense disambiguation and discourse analysis) and vital emerging applications (e.g., machine translation, sentiment analysis, summarization and information extraction).", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Machine Learning for Data Science", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5786", "professor": ["Karthik Sridharan"], "description": "An introduction to machine learning for data-science applications. Topics include dimensionality-reduction (such as principal components analysis, canonical correlation analysis, and random projection); clustering (such as k-means and single-link); probabilistic modeling (such as mixture models and the EM algorithm).\u00a0This course can be taken independently or in any order with CS 4780/CS 5780.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Deep Learning", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5787", "professor": ["Christopher Kanan"], "description": null, "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Networks and Markets", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5854", "professor": ["Rafael Pass"], "description": "The course examines how the computing, economic and sociological worlds are connected and how these connections affects these worlds. Tools from computer science, game theory and mathematics are introduced and then used to analyze network structures present in everyday life. Topics covered include social networks, web search, auctions, markets, voting, and crypto-currencies (e.g. bitcoin).", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Master of Engineering Internship", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5998", "professor": [], "description": "Off-campus internship with industry in which a student gains knowledge and experience in the field of computer science.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Master of Engineering Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5999", "professor": ["William Arms"], "description": "Independent or group project under the direction of a CS field member or researcher. Projects involve the development of a computer science application (software or hardware) useful in exploring and/or solving an engineering problem with a computer science focus.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Programming Languages", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6110", "professor": ["Adrian Sampson"], "description": "Study of programming paradigms: functional, imperative, concurrent, and probabilistic programming. Mathematical foundations: inductive definitions, fixed points, and formal semantics. Models of programming languages including the lambda calculus. Type systems, polymorphism, modules, and object-oriented constructs. Program transformations, program logic, and applications to programming methodology.\u00a0", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Numerical Methods for Data Science", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6241", "professor": ["Austin Benson"], "description": "A discussion of numerical methods in the context of data analysis, machine learning, and network science problems. The course will focus on matrix and tensor decompositions, numerical algorithms for graph data, least squares, regression, and iterative methods.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Database Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6320", "professor": ["Immanuel Trummer"], "description": "Covers a variety of advanced issues ranging from transaction management to query processing to data mining. Involves extensive paper reading and discussion.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Educational Technology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6360", "professor": ["Erik Andersen"], "description": "An introduction to research in educational technology \u2013 an interdisciplinary field that draws from human-computer interaction, design, artificial intelligence, and video games. Potential topics include learning science, instructional scaffolding, knowledge representations, diagnosis of misconceptions, adaptation, intelligent tutoring systems, Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), games for learning, automation, user studies, data analysis, and large-scale experimentation. Combines lectures, group activities, paper reading, and a semester-long team project. Particular emphasis is placed on the design, implementation, and release of research artifacts that achieve real-world impact.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Artificial Intelligence", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6700", "professor": ["Bart Selman"], "description": "Covers a variety of areas in AI, including knowledge representation, automated reasoning, learning, game-playing, and planning, with an emphasis on computational issues.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Language Technologies", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6740", "professor": ["Claire Cardie"], "description": "Graduate-level introduction to technologies for the computational treatment of information in human-language form, covering modern natural-language processing (NLP) and/or information retrieval (IR). Possible topics include latent semantic analysis (LSI), clickthrough data for web search, language modeling, text categorization and clustering, information extraction, computational syntactic and semantic formalisms, grammar induction, and machine translation.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Machine Learning", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6780", "professor": ["Thorsten Joachims"], "description": "Gives a graduate-level introduction to machine learning and in-depth coverage of new and advanced methods in machine learning, as well as their underlying theory. Emphasizes approaches with practical relevance and discusses a number of recent applications of machine learning in areas like information retrieval, recommender systems, data mining, computer vision, natural language processing and robotics. An open research project is a major part of the course.\u00a0", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Designing Secure Cryptography", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6831", "professor": ["Thomas Ristenpart"], "description": "Discusses modern theory and practice of the cryptographic tools deployed to protect contemporary computing systems. Topics include formulation of security definitions, reduction-based concrete security analysis, evaluation of real-world implementations, common pitfalls, and attacks. Active research topics will be highlighted throughout.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Logics of Programs", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6860", "professor": ["Dexter Kozen"], "description": "Topics in type theory as a foundation for programming languages and computing theory. The key prerequisites are CS 6110\u00a0and CS 4810. Topics will include: semantics of programming languages and logics, constructive and intuitionistic logics, the propositions-as-types principle, extracting proofs from programs, Hoare logics and Kleene algebras for reasoning about programs, computational complexity in type theory, formal relationships among type theories and programming logics, inductive and co-inductive types.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Computer Science Colloquium", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7090", "professor": ["Kavita Bala"], "description": "Weekly meeting for the discussion and study of important topics in the field.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Seminar in Programming Languages", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7190", "professor": ["Dexter Kozen", "Adrian Sampson"], "description": "The Programming Languages Discussion Group meets weekly to discuss papers in the area of programming languages, program analysis, and compilers. The goal is to encourage interactions and discussions between students, researchers, and faculty with interests in this area. The seminar is open to everybody interested in languages and compilers. First-year and second-year students are especially encouraged to participate.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Great Works in Programming Languages", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7194", "professor": ["Nate Foster", "Megan Gatch"], "description": "This seminar covers classic papers in the area of programming languages. The goal is to give students an in-depth introduction to some of the most important ideas in the field, to provide a foundation for advanced research. Participants will be expected to read one or two papers each week, and to lead one presentation each semester. The seminar is open to everybody interested in programming languages. First and second-year graduate students are especially encouraged to participate.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Seminar on Scientific Computing and Numerics", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7290", "professor": ["Anil Damle", "Alex Townsend"], "description": "Talks on various methods in scientific computing, the analysis of their convergence properties and computational efficiency, and their adaptation to specific applications.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Research Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7490", "professor": ["Emin Sirer", "Robbert Van Renesse"], "description": "The Systems Research Seminar discusses recent, interesting papers in the systems area, broadly defined to span operating systems, distributed systems, networking, architecture, databases, security, and programming languages. The goal is to foster technical discussions among the Cornell systems research community.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Computer Security Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7493", "professor": ["Andrew Myers"], "description": "This is a graduate seminar primarily aimed at Ph.D. students. Students will read, present, and discuss recent and classic papers in the computer security area. Outside speakers will also be invited to present current research.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Computer Graphics Seminar", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7690", "professor": ["Kavita Bala", "Stephen Marschner"], "description": "The Graphics/Vision Research Seminar discusses recent research in the areas of computer graphics and computer vision. The goal is to foster technical discussions and collaboration among the Cornell graphics and vision research community.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Seminar in Artificial Intelligence", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7790", "professor": ["Kilian Weinberger"], "description": "The AI seminar will meet weekly for lectures by graduate students, faculty, and researchers emphasizing work-in-progress and recent results in AI research.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Machine Learning", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7792", "professor": ["Kilian Weinberger"], "description": "Reading group on advanced topics in machine learning.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Seminar in Natural Language Understanding", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7794", "professor": ["Yoav Artzi", "Claire Cardie", "Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil"], "description": "This course, the NLP seminar, is a weekly meeting for people currently or soon to be actively doing research in NLP. (Students simply looking to learn more about NLP should not enroll, but should take one of our lecture courses instead.) One participant leads discussion each week, either of a recently published paper or of their own work in progress. Attendance at all sessions is mandatory.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Robotics Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7796", "professor": ["Ross Knepper"], "description": "Informal seminar in which current topics in robotics are discussed.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Seminar in Theory of Algorithms and Computing", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7890", "professor": ["Robert Kleinberg"], "description": "", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Cryptography Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7893", "professor": ["Rafael Pass"], "description": "Seminar for discussing recent or classical papers in cryptography.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Independent Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7999", "professor": ["Ross Knepper"], "description": "Independent research for CS PhD students who have not yet passed their A-exam.", "subject": "CS"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "9999", "professor": [], "description": "Doctoral research.", "subject": "CS"}], "NSE": [{"courseTitle": "Introduction to Controlled Fusion: Principles and Technology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand the scientific basis for controlled fusion by both magnetic confinement and inertial confinement approaches, as well as the technological requirements for practical electric power generation by the controlled fusion process. Be able determine the energy release of any nuclear reaction or reaction chain using the mass-energy relationship, and be able to solve well-posed engineering problems in plasma physics as applied to controlled fusion using Maxwell's equations and the equations of motion of charged particles in electric and magnetic fields. Be able to solve well-posed engineering problems in energy generation by controlled fusion having to do with the properties of materials in the presence of neutron irradiation and other relevant processes. Understand the fundamental role played by energy in our society and in the developing world, the potential role fusion can play, and the reasons that it is potentially more attractive than fission-based electric power generation. Be able to determine the state-of-the-art of different aspects of fusion reactor design by independent study using books, journals, conference proceedings, reports on the web and personal communication with experts.", "courseNumber": "4840", "professor": ["David Hammer"], "description": "Introduction to the physical principles and various engineering aspects underlying power generation by controlled fusion. Topics include fuels and conditions required for fusion power and basic fusion-reactor concepts; fundamental aspects of plasma physics relevant to fusion plasmas and basic engineering problems for a fusion reactor; and an engineering analysis of proposed magnetic and/or inertial confinement fusion-reactor designs.", "subject": "NSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Independent Study", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5900", "professor": ["Bing Cady"], "description": "Independent study or project under guidance of a faculty member.", "subject": "NSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Project", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5910", "professor": ["David Hammer"], "description": null, "subject": "NSE"}, {"courseTitle": "M.S. Thesis Research", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6900", "professor": ["David Hammer"], "description": null, "subject": "NSE"}], "SYSEN": [{"courseTitle": "Systems Engineering Project for Freshmen", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1900", "professor": ["David Schneider"], "description": "Project experience for students who want to pursue a particular analytical, computational, or experimental project experience outside of regular courses. An engineering report on the project is required of each student. Intended for freshmen on project teams and for project team members performing non-technical tasks.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Engineering Project for Undergraduates", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4900", "professor": ["David Schneider"], "description": "Project experience for students who want to pursue a particular analytical, computational, or experimental project experience outside of regular courses, or for informal instruction supplementing that given in regular courses. An engineering report on the project is required of each student. Students are expected to spend 3-4 hours per week per credit hour working on the project. Intended for sophomores, juniors, and seniors on project teams performing technical\u00a0tasks.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Service System Modeling and Design", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5130", "professor": ["Jamol Pender"], "description": "Service systems arise primarily from the service sector of the economy. Examples are contact centers\u00a0(also known as call centers), airlines, insurance and healthcare. This course describes techniques that are useful in the analysis and design of such systems. The class is structured around a number of cases. The emphasis is on modeling, solving the models, and interpreting the results. Both operational and strategic decisions are covered through appropriate examples.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Analysis Behavior and Optimization", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5200", "professor": ["David Goldberg"], "description": "This is an advanced course in the application of the systems engineering process to the architecture design and operation of complex systems. Topics include techniques for design, simulation, optimization, and control of complex systems. Case studies and system simulations in diverse areas provide context for the application of these techniques.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Theory and Practice of Systems Architecture", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5400", "professor": ["H. Oliver Gao"], "description": "Every system has an architecture (its essence, or DNA), i.e., a high-level abstraction of its design that provides a unifying concept for detailed design and commits most of the system's performance and lifecycle cost. This course presents the frameworks, methods, and tools required to analyze and synthesize system architectures. The course has a theory part that emphasizes synergies between humans and computers in the architecture process, and a practical part based on a long project and guest lectures by real system architects. The theory part covers topics such as architecture views, layers and projections, stakeholder networks, dealing with fuzziness, automatic concept generation, architecture space exploration, patterns and styles, heuristics, and knowledge engineering. The practice part focuses on special topics such as commonality, platforming, reuse, upstream and downstream influences, and software architecture.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Modeling Language: Fundamentals and Practice", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5500", "professor": ["Wesley Hewett", "Wenqi Yi"], "description": "Fundamentals and practice of Systems Modeling Language (SysML) for graphically specifying, analyzing, designing, and verifying complex systems. The focus and vision is on building unambiguous and computable\u00a0 models of systems behavior and structure that capture systems requirements and specifications.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Systems Engineering", "offered": "", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5700", "professor": ["David Schneider"], "description": "Supervised study by individuals or small groups of one or more specialized topics not covered in regular courses.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Design Thinking for Complex Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5740", "professor": ["Sirietta Simoncini"], "description": "In this project-based class, interdisciplinary teams will combine design thinking and systems engineering techniques to define and solve complex systems and organization problems.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Industrial Big Data Analytics and Machine Learning", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5880", "professor": ["Fengqi You"], "description": "This course covers the basic concepts, models and algorithms of Bayesian learning, classification, regression, dimension reduction, clustering, density estimation, artificial neural networks, deep learning, and reinforcement learning. Application and methodology topics include process monitoring, fault diagnosis, preventive maintenance, root cause analysis, soft sensing, quality control, machine learning for process optimization, data-driven decision making under uncertainty, missing data imputation, data de-noising, and anomaly/outlier detection.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Engineering Design Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5900", "professor": ["David Schneider"], "description": "A design project that incorporates the principles of systems engineering for a complex system. Projects are performed by teams of students working together to meet the requirements of the project.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Seminar Series", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6100", "professor": ["H. Oliver Gao", "David Schneider"], "description": "This is a weekly seminar course designed to give graduate students experience in improving their skills in presenting their research, judging peers' and field experts' research, as well as learning to accurately dissect and summarize the main points of a research talk. Being part of the Systems Engineering program, this course will strongly focus on developing the ability to present research in a broader context or as it relates to a larger system or process, and communicate the importance of the students' work to a more varied audience; a particularly important skill for both future \"job talks\" and grants' \"importance paragraphs.\" Students' presentations will also include some research depth as part of developing stronger conference talks and to aid classmates in expanding their knowledge.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Theory and Practice of Systems Architecture", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6400", "professor": ["H. Oliver Gao"], "description": null, "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Multiobjective Systems Engineering Under Uncertainty", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Incorporate conflicting objectives, account for system uncertainties, and exploit careful design diagnostics to guide problem formulation and capture key design dependencies. Use and advance software frameworks that combine evolutionary multiobjective optimization, high performance computing, uncertainty modeling techniques, and visual design analytics. Facilitate improved decision making in multi-stakeholder systems engineering design processes. Effectively communicate design analysis results visually and in writing.", "courseNumber": "6410", "professor": ["Patrick Reed"], "description": "Exploration of engineering design frameworks that effectively exploit simulation, optimization, and uncertainty assessments when balancing large numbers of conflicting performance objectives. Students will learn and advance software frameworks that combine evolutionary multiobjective optimization, high performance computing, uncertainty modeling techniques, and visual design analytics. The primary focus will be improving multi-stakeholder design of complex engineered systems. Course concepts will be demonstrated using case studies and projects drawn from the disciplines of the students enrolled.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Industrial Big Data Analytics and Machine Learning", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6880", "professor": ["Fengqi You"], "description": "This course covers the basic concepts, models and algorithms of Bayesian learning, classification, regression, dimension reduction, clustering, density estimation, artificial neural networks, deep learning, and reinforcement learning. Application and methodology topics include process monitoring, fault diagnosis, preventive maintenance, root cause analysis, soft sensing, quality control, machine learning for process optimization, data-driven decision making under uncertainty, missing data imputation, data de-noising, and anomaly/outlier detection.", "subject": "SYSEN"}, {"courseTitle": "Systems Seminar Series - PhD", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8100", "professor": ["Daniel Selva"], "description": null, "subject": "SYSEN"}], "STSCI": [{"courseTitle": "Data Science for All", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1380", "professor": ["James Booth", "Andrew Wilson"], "description": "For description, see CS 1380.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Introductory Statistics", "offered": "Fall, Winter, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2100", "professor": ["M. Karns"], "description": "Statistics is about understanding the world through data. We are surrounded by data, so there is a lot to understand. Covers data exploration and display, data gathering methods, probability, and statistical inference methods through contingency tables and linear regression. The emphasis is on thinking scientifically, understanding what is commonly done with data (and doing some of it for yourself), and laying a foundation for further study. Students learn to use statistical software and simulation tools to discover fundamental results. They use computers regularly; the test includes both multimedia materials and a software package. This course does not focus on data from any particular discipline, but will use real-world examples from a wide variety of disciplines and current events.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Statistical Methods for the Social Sciences II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2110", "professor": ["Kevin Packard"], "description": "A second course in statistics that emphasizes applications to the social sciences. Topics include simple linear regression, multiple linear regression (theory, model building, and model diagnostics), and the analysis of variance. Computer packages are used extensively.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Introductory Statistics for Biology", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2150", "professor": ["Melissa Smith"], "description": "This course provides an introduction to data analysis and statistical inference illustrated with biological applications. The computer labs will teach graphical analysis and statistical computation using R. Topics include graphical display, populations and sampling, probability distributions, expectation and variance, estimation, testing, correlation, regression, contingency tables, and the design of experiments. Emphasis is on concepts and the careful modeling of biological data, so that statistical methods are applied properly, pitfalls are avoided, and sound conclusions are reached.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Probability Models and Inference", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to manipulate random variables and their distributions using differential and integral calculus. Students will be able to derive properties of standard probability. Students will be able to derive maximum likelihood estimators for standard probability distributions and discuss their properties.", "courseNumber": "3080", "professor": ["Florentina Bunea"], "description": "This course provides an introduction to probability and parametric inference. Topics include: random variables, standard distributions, the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem, likelihood-based estimation, sampling distributions and hypothesis testing, as well as an introduction to Bayesian methods. Some assignments may involve computation using the R programming language.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Probability Models and Inference for the Social Sciences", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3110", "professor": ["Thomas Diciccio"], "description": "This course provides an introduction to probability and parametric inference. Topics include: random variables, standard distributions, the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem, likelihood-based estimation, sampling distributions and hypothesis testing.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Biological Statistics II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to design a statistical experiment using randomization techniques. Students will be able to analyze multivariate linear and nonlinear data that include quantitative and qualitative variables. Students will be able to apply generalized linear model, generalized additive models, and mixed effects models to appropriately collected data. Students will be able to formulate and evaluate parametric and nonparametric methods for determining model uncertainty. Students will be able to employ matrix methods to effectively design and implement linear models. Students will be able to assess the quality of a statistical analysis.", "courseNumber": "3200", "professor": ["Russell Lloyd"], "description": "Applies linear statistical methods to quantitative problems addressed in biological and environmental research. Methods include linear regression, inference, model assumption evaluation, the likelihood approach, matrix formulation, generalized linear models, single-factor and multifactor analysis of variance (ANOVA), and a brief foray into nonlinear modeling. Carries out applied analysis in a statistical computing environment.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Engineering Stochastic Processes I", "offered": "Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3510", "professor": ["Gennady Samorodnitsky"], "description": "Uses basic concepts and techniques of random processes to construct models for a variety of problems of practical interest. Topics include the Poisson process, Markov chains, renewal theory, models for queuing, and reliability.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Python Programming and its Applications in Statistics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4060", "professor": ["Xiaolong Yang"], "description": "The first part of the course teaches basic Python programming knowledge and skills. The second part deals with Python application in statistics (e.g., data visualization and statistical analysis), Python-database integration (e.g., access, update and control an Oracle database), and Python web services (e.g., database-driven dynamic webpages using Python CGI scripts). These techniques are utilized in a comprehensive course project.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Theory of Statistics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Describe the general principles of statistical estimation and testing. Design a statistical estimator in a principled way based on a description of a dataset. Analyze the theoretical properties of an estimator and a hypothesis test. Calculate and correctly interpret confidence intervals, p-values, statistical significance, and power. Recognize the general principles underlying common statistical procedures.", "courseNumber": "4090", "professor": ["Martin Wells"], "description": "Introduction to classical theory of parametric statistical inference that builds on the material covered in BTRY 3080. Topics include sampling distributions, principles of data reduction, likelihood, parameter estimation, hypothesis testing, interval estimation, and basic asymptotic theory.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Categorical Data", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate years).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4110", "professor": ["Melissa Smith"], "description": "Categorical data analysis, including logistic regression, log-linear models, stratified tables, matched pairs analysis, polytomous response, and ordinal data. Applications in biological, biomedical and social sciences.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Applied Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to explain the basic design principles such as randomization, blocking and stratification. Students will be able to determine an appropriate design based on design principles. Students will be able to apply standard designs to date using modern statistical software and interpret the results.", "courseNumber": "4140", "professor": ["John Bunge"], "description": "Applications of experimental design including split plots, incomplete blocks, and fractional factorials. Stresses use of the computer for both design and analysis, with emphasis on solving real data problems.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Statistical Computing", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to enter, manipulate and plot data and run basic statistical analyses in R. Students will be able to implement estimators for non-standard statistical problems in R. Students will be able to simulate random variables and random experiments in R. Students will be able to design and implement Monte Carlo methods to evaluate integrals and perform simulations. Students will be able to design and conduct appropriate resampling methods to estimate sampling variance for statistical estimates.", "courseNumber": "4520", "professor": ["Giles Hooker"], "description": "This course is designed to provide students with an introduction to statistical computing. The class will cover the basics of programming; numerical methods for optimization and linear algebra and their application to statistical estimation, generating random variables, bootstrap, jackknife and permutation methods, Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods, Bayesian inference and computing with latent variables.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Applied Time Series Analysis", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4550", "professor": ["Maryclare Griffin"], "description": "Introduces statistical tools for the analysis of time-dependent data. Data analysis and application will be an integral part of this course. Topics include linear, nonlinear, seasonal, multivariate modeling, and financial time series.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Operations Research Tools for Financial Engineering", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4630", "professor": ["Thomas Diciccio"], "description": "Introduction to the applications of OR techniques, e.g., probability, statistics, and optimization, to finance and financial engineering. The course reviews probability and statistics and\u00a0surveys assets returns, ARIMA time series models, portfolio selection using quadratic programming, regression, CAPM and factor models, option pricing, GARCH models, fixed-income securities, and resampling techniques. Covers the use of R for statistical calculations, simulation,\u00a0and optimization.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Special Topics in Statistics", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4940", "professor": ["Martin Wells"], "description": "Course of lectures selected by the faculty.\u00a0 Because topics usually change from year to year, this course may be repeated for credit.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Supervised Teaching", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4970", "professor": ["Martin Wells"], "description": "Students assist in teaching a course appropriate to their previous training. Students meet with a discussion or laboratory section and regularly discuss objectives with the course instructor.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Tutorial in Actuarial Statistics", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4980", "professor": ["Martin Wells"], "description": "Problem solving sessions to prepare students for the first four actuarial examinations (probability, financial mathematics, statistical modeling, and risk management).", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Individual Study in Statistics", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4990", "professor": ["Martin Wells"], "description": "Course consists of individual tutorial study selected by faculty. Because topics usually change year to year this course may be repeated for credit.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Dissertation Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4999", "professor": ["Martin Wells"], "description": "Research at the undergraduate level.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Big Data Management and Analysis", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5065", "professor": ["Xiaolong Yang"], "description": "Concepts, challenges, and industry trends of big data, with a focus on the Hadoop system. Topics include: basics of the Apache Hadoop platform and Hadoop ecosystem; the Hadoop distributed file system (HDFS); MapReduce or its alternative, a parallel programming model for distributed processing of large data sets; common big data tools, such as Pig (a procedural data processing language for Hadoop parallel computation), Hive (a declarative SQL-like language to handle Hadoop jobs), HBase (the most popular NoSQL database), and YARN; case studies; and\u00a0 integration of Hadoop with statistical software packages, e.g., SAS and R.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Statistical Methods for the Social Sciences II", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5110", "professor": ["Kevin Packard"], "description": "Second course in statistics that emphasizes applications to the social sciences. Topics include simple linear regression, multiple linear regression (theory, model building, and model diagnostics), and the analysis of variance. Computer packages are used extensively.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Statistics for Financial Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5640", "professor": ["David Ruppert"], "description": "Regression, ARIMA, GARCH, stochastic volatility, and factor models. Calibration of financial engineering models, estimation of diffusion models, estimation of risk measures, multivariate models and copulas, bayesian statistics. Students are instructed in the use of R software; prior knowledge of R is helpful but not required. This course is intended for M.Eng. students in financial engineering and assumes some familiarity with finance and financial engineering. Students not in the financial engineering program are welcome if they have a suitable background. Students with no background in finance should consider taking ORIE 4630\u00a0instead.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Directed Studies in Applied Statistics", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5990", "professor": ["Xiaolong Yang"], "description": "For individual or group research projects conducted under the direction of a member of STSCI faculty or instructors in a special area of statistical science that is not covered by regular course offerings.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Applied Statistics MPS Data Analysis Project", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5999", "professor": ["Francoise Vermeylen"], "description": "It is a long-term, in-depth statistical analysis of real-world dataset using various statistical methods and computer packages (such as SAS, R, SPSS, etc.). Students work in teams (of maximum size 4) to solve business, managerial or scientific problems for clients. Projects are assigned by Dept. of Statistical Science to teams. Each team has a dedicated faculty adviser, who supervises the projects and assigns grades. Grades are assigned individually to team members. In special cases teams may collaborate with groups in other Departments, e.g., M.Eng. project teams.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Computationally Intensive Statistical Methods", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6520", "professor": ["Sumanta Basu"], "description": "Modern statistical methods routinely used in practice for analyzing large, complex datasets require intensive computation. This course covers topics in statistical computing, including numerical optimization and finding zeros (likelihood and related techniques), random number generation and Monte Carlo methods, bootstrap and subsampling, dimension reduction, nonlinear predictive modeling and parallel computing. Programming will be done in R.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Special Topics in Statistics", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6940", "professor": ["Kengo Kato"], "description": "", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Level Dissertation Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7999", "professor": ["Martin Wells"], "description": "Research at the Ph.D. Level.", "subject": "STSCI"}, {"courseTitle": "Doctoral Level Dissertation Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "9999", "professor": ["Martin Wells"], "description": "Doctoral Level Dissertation Research.", "subject": "STSCI"}], "ENGRG": [{"courseTitle": "AEW Collaborative Workshop: CHEM 2090", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1009", "professor": ["Anne Poduska"], "description": "Academic Excellence Workshop for CHEM 2090. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CHEM 2090.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "AEW Collaborative Workshop: CS 1110", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1010", "professor": ["Anne Poduska"], "description": "Academic Excellence Workshop for CS 1110. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CS 1110.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "AEW Collaborative Workshop: CS 2110", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1011", "professor": ["Anne Poduska"], "description": "Academic Excellence Workshop for CS 2110. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CS 2110.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "AEW Collaborative Workshop: CS 1112", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1012", "professor": ["Anne Poduska"], "description": "Academic Excellence Workshop for CS 1112\u00a0. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CS 1112.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "EOEntreprenuerism - Kessler", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1020", "professor": ["Tracey Brant"], "description": null, "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "AEW Collaborative Workshop: MATH 1920", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1092", "professor": ["Anne Poduska"], "description": "Academic Excellence Workshop for MATH 1920. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in MATH 1920.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "AEW Collaborative Workshop: MATH 2930", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1093", "professor": ["Anne Poduska"], "description": "Academic Excellence Workshop for MATH 2930. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in MATH 2930.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "AEW Collaborative Workshop: MATH 2940", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1094", "professor": ["Anne Poduska"], "description": "Academic Excellence Workshop for MATH 2940. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in MATH 2940.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Engineering in Reality", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1400", "professor": ["Mike Thompson"], "description": "Overview of engineering fundamentals and disciplines for enhanced interactions between non-engineers and engineers. Topics include Engineering Disciplines, Engineering Nomenclature, Project Planning, Organizational Structure, and Quality. Through Engineering Student Project Teams, students are in an applied setting that fosters knowledge transfer from the classroom to practice and development of professional skills necessary to work in multidisciplinary teams. Students will participate on their team and regularly attend team meetings as well as course seminars held during the semester.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Career Development in Engineering", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2350", "professor": ["John Belina"], "description": "Prepare to engage, reflect, and explore! This discussion based course will consist of in-class activities, journaling exercises, and homework assignments for shaping your career goals, choices, and planning. Through this course, you will develop an awareness of and ability to manage the career development process. You will be able to communicate with confidence about your values, skills, and strengths. You will learn to make connections with others who can assist you in your career development and advancement. You will create your own personal mission and vision statements. And, you will apply engineering knowledge to product design. If you are looking for a challenging and thought-provoking experience that encourages asking question, being curious, and taking risks, you've found it!", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "AEW Collaborative Workshop: ENGRD 2700", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2700", "professor": ["Anne Poduska"], "description": "Academic Excellence Workshop for ENGRD 2700. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions.\u00a0 Peer facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in ENGRD 2700\u00a0(Basic Engineering Probability and Statistics).", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Engineering Economics and Management", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Gain a working knowledge of money management and how to make economic comparisons of alternative engineering designs or projects. Understand the impact of inflation, taxation, depreciation.  Financial planning, economic basis for replacement, project scheduling, and legal and regulatory issues are introduced and applied to economic investment and project-management problems. Appreciation of ethical and other non-economic issues related to professional and personal financial and economic decisions.", "courseNumber": "3230", "professor": ["Ricardo Daziano"], "description": "Introduction to engineering and business economics investment alternatives and to project management. Intended to give students a working knowledge of money management and how to make economic comparisons of alternatives involving future benefits and cost. The impact of inflation, taxation, depreciation, financial planning, economic optimization, project scheduling, and legal and regulatory issues are introduced and applied to economic investment and planning and project-management problems.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Developing STEM Storytelling Skills with WSKG Public Media and PBS NewsHour", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3360", "professor": ["Julie Nucci"], "description": "If you can't communicate your science and engineering ideas, their potential can't be realized. This course tackles the challenge of 21st century STEM communication by developing both the technical and storytelling skills needed to create engaging presentations, videos, and professional social media posts.\u00a0 Whether you are a doctoral student preparing for an academic position or a member of an engineering project team that needs to fundraise, this course will give you the skills you need to effectively communicate. The content created will also be utilized regionally by WSKG and nationally by the PBS NewsHour. Cornell is the first university-based, STEM student reporting lab of the PBS NewsHour and part of our mission is to mentor high school-based STEM student reporting labs across the country. The Director of Science Content at WSKG, our local NPR/PBS affiliate, will co-teach the course.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Engineering in Reality", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3400", "professor": ["Mike Thompson"], "description": "Overview of engineering fundamentals and disciplines for enhanced interactions between non-engineers and engineers. Topics include Engineering Disciplines, Engineering Nomenclature, Project Planning, Organizational Structure, and Quality. Through Engineering Student Project Teams, students are in an applied setting that fosters knowledge transfer from the classroom to practice and development of professional skills necessary to work in multidisciplinary teams. Students will participate on their team and regularly attend team meetings as well as course seminars held during the semester.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Ethical Issues in Engineering Practice", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand current conceptions of engineering ethics. Have an appreciation for philosophical/sociological models underlying analyses of engineering practice. Understand the implications of (2) for considerations of engineering ethics. Be versed in the historical and technical details of particular episodes in engineering (Space Shuttle Challenger, Columbia, Ford Pinto\u2026), current events (VW case, Tesla case\u2026), and emerging technologies (brain-machine interface, gene editing, intelligent autonomous systems\u2026). Be able to communicate in writing effective, compelling arguments supported by evidence.", "courseNumber": "3600", "professor": ["Park Doing"], "description": "Studies ethical issues involved in engineering practice. Explores the engineer's role in technical decision-making in organizations. Considers the engineer's relationship to the uses of technology in society, especially emerging technologies. Case studies covered include the Space Shuttle Challenger, the Space Shuttle Columbia, The\u00a0Macondo Well Blowout, The Ford Pinto Case, The VW Emissions scandal, the Tesla Automatic Driving accident, Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, Fukushima, and the Bhopal case, among others. Technology topics considered include brain-machine interface, human enhancement, genetic engineering, intelligent autonomous systems,\u00a0privacy and surveillance,\u00a0energy\u00a0technologies, and environmental issues, among others. Codes of ethics in engineering, ethical theory, philosophical models of knowledge production, and sociological models of human and technological agency are introduced to analyze these issues.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Foundations of Engineering Leadership", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3900", "professor": ["Erica Dawson", "Robin Parker"], "description": "This is the first of two required classes in the Engineering Leadership Certification Program. The focus is on the \"self\" and \"team\" competencies covered in the certification program. Students gain knowledge about their own strengths, values, purpose, goals, and derailers. Further topics include project management basics, presentation skills, communication and team dynamics. Working from this foundation, students propose and form teams to enact a Leadership Project that has meaning and impact. Note that this class includes two required weekend retreats in addition to the regularly scheduled class: one during the first week of classes in January and the other in April.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Entrepreneurship for Engineers", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to read and understand private equity term sheets and analyze businesses from financial and strategic perspectives. Be able to provide written and oral communications in a business setting and work on a team. Understand market forces, pricing, competition, the nature of the process of entrepreneurship, and operational aspects of starting new technology-based businesses. Be familiar with the common forms of intellectual property protection. Appreciate the ethical issues that are found in entrepreneurial activities.", "courseNumber": "4610", "professor": ["John Richard Callister"], "description": "Develops skills necessary to identify, evaluate, and begin new business ventures. Topics include intellectual property, competition, strategy, business plans, technology forecasting, finance and accounting, and sources of capital. A rigorous, quantitative approach is stressed throughout, and students create financial documents and plans, analyze human resource models, and work with sophisticated valuation methods, complicated equity structures, and legal and business documents. As such, this course represents the \"red meat\" of entrepreneurship, and the soft skills are left for other courses. Course work consists of discussions, assignments, and the preparation and presentation of a complete business plan.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Research in Nanoscale Science and Engineering", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4920", "professor": ["Carl Batt"], "description": null, "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Engineering Leadership: Social Impact Trek", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4950", "professor": ["Erica Dawson"], "description": "Course offers experience with practice of socially responsible engineering leadership in emerging markets. The first part of the course (February \u2013 March) is dedicated to research, preparation, and project planning.\u00a0 Students work in teams with an international partner organization to identify potential engineering solutions to local challenges. Based on this research, they design a project to be implemented during a self-funded spring break trek to the partner country (year dependent). Following the trek, students reflect on their experiences in discussion groups and through written assignments.\u00a0 Through this class, students will be exposed to topics including social entrepreneurship, sustainable development, corporate social responsibly, and private-public sector development from an international perspective. They will gain experience working in teams in an unfamiliar environment with time pressure, uncertainty, and limited resources.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Entrepreneurial Practicum in Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4960", "professor": ["John Richard Callister"], "description": "This course provides a means by which engineering students can develop and refine their innovative technical ideas.\u00a0 The course is tailored to individual student or student group needs, linking them with mentors and resources, including prototyping facilities, to help enable them to move their innovative ideas forward.\u00a0", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Teaching in Engineering Leadership", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4990", "professor": ["Erica Dawson", "Robin Parker"], "description": null, "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Career Development for Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5350", "professor": ["John Belina"], "description": "Discussion based course engaging students in the career planning and job search process. Students will develop essential job search skills, learn how to research employers, prepare for interviews, and develop professional networks. Career-related decision making and ethics will also be covered.", "subject": "ENGRG"}, {"courseTitle": "Teaching Seminar", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6780", "professor": ["Anne Poduska"], "description": "Independent study promoting reflection on teaching styles and experiences for teaching assistants in the College of Engineering. Participants must be concurrently fulfilling a TA assignment. Requirements include participation in the College of Engineering's TA Development Program, consisting of an initial one and one-half day training session, followed by one evening microteaching session early in the semester; participation in the TA midterm evaluation process, followed by a formal feedback session with program staff; and completion of a reflective journal on teaching experiences. Designed to provide TAs with the opportunity to process their understanding of teaching and learning through the formulation of questions, concepts, and theories related to their experiences.", "subject": "ENGRG"}], "INFO": [{"courseTitle": "Information Ethics, Law, and Policy", "offered": "Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1200", "professor": ["Steven Jackson"], "description": "This course investigates the ethical, legal, and policy foundations of contemporary information technology. Through lectures, readings, discussions, and short assignments, we will address contemporary challenges ranging from privacy in big data and social computing to the nature of innovation, property, and collaboration in a networked world. We will cover key areas of technology law and policy such as telecommunications and network policy; concentration and antitrust; free speech and the first amendment; intellectual property; and privacy, security and freedom of information. We will also address new ethical questions and controversies that law and policy has yet to sort out. Through this course you'll learn about the key frameworks, processes, and institutions that govern the contemporary world of technology, along with key theories and methods from the academic fields that shape and inform them (law, philosophy, economics, political science, communication, sociology, etc.). You'll also learn core writing and analytic skills central to success in the worlds of social science, law, policy, and many other settings. But above all you'll learn to engage critically and strategically with the worlds of information and technology around you, deciding what kind of information consumer, user, and citizen YOU want to be.\u00a0\u00a0", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Freshmen Team Projects", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "1998", "professor": ["Walker White"], "description": "Independent work in information science as part of a student-led team project. Intended for freshmen on project teams, project team members in training, and for project team members performing tasks that are not core to information science.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Intermediate Design and Programming for the Web", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2300", "professor": ["Kyle Harms"], "description": "Web programming requires the cooperation of two machines: the one in front of the viewer (client) and the one delivering the content (server).\u00a0INFO 1300\u00a0concentrates almost exclusively on the client side. The main emphasis in INFO 2300 is learning about server side processing. Students begin with a short overview of the PHP server-side scripting language, then look at interactions with databases, learning about querying via the database language SQL. Through a succession of projects, students learn how to apply this understanding to the creation of an interactive, data-driven site via PHP and the MYSQL database. Also considered are technologies such as Javascript and Ajax and techniques to enhance security and privacy. Design and usability issues are emphasized. A major component of the course is the creation of a substantial web site.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Excursions in Computational Sustainability", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to identify notions of sustainability as they arise in ecology, geology, economics, and other biological, physical, and social sciences. Students will be able to mathematically interpret and calculate levels of sustainability. Students will learn how to problem solve techniques of sustainability via computational models, algorithms, and statistical methods.", "courseNumber": "2770", "professor": ["Carla Gomes", "Bart Selman"], "description": "Balancing environmental, economic, and societal needs for a sustainable future encompasses problems of unprecedented size and complexity. Computing and information science can play an important role in addressing critical sustainability challenges faced by present and future generations. The goal of the course is to introduce students to a range of sustainability challenges and to computational methods that can help address such challenges. Sustainability topics include sustainable development, biodiversity and wildlife conservation, poverty mitigation, food security, renewable resources, energy, transportation, and climate change. In the context of these sustainability topics, the course will introduce students to mathematical and computational modeling techniques, algorithms, and statistical methods. The course is at the introductory undergraduate level. Students are expected to have basic knowledge of probability theory and calculus.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Data Science", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2950", "professor": ["David Mimno"], "description": "Teaches basic mathematical methods for information science, with applications to data science. Topics include discrete probability, Bayesian methods, graph theory, power law distributions, Markov models, and hidden Markov models. Uses examples and applications from various areas of information science such as the structure of the web, genomics, social networks, natural language processing, and signal processing. Assignments require python programming.\n\u00a0", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Computational Psychology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3140", "professor": ["Shimon Edelman"], "description": "This course states and motivates the observation that cognition is fundamentally a computational process and explores the implications of this idea. Students are introduced to a variety of conceptual tools for thinking about cognitive information processing, including statistical learning from experience and the use of patterns distilled from past experience in guiding future actions. They learn to apply these tools to gain understanding of perception, memory, motor control, language, action planning, problem solving, decision making, reasoning, intelligence, and creativity.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Computer Game Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3152", "professor": ["Walker White"], "description": "A project-based course in which programmers and designers collaborate to make a computer game. This course investigates the theory and practice of developing computer games from a blend of technical, aesthetic, and cultural perspectives. Technical aspects of game architecture include software engineering, artificial intelligence, game physics, computer graphics, and networking. Aesthetic and cultural aspects include art and modeling, sound and music, game balance, and player experience.\u00a0", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "New Media and Society", "offered": "Spring, Summer.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to develop analytical tools for understanding the complex information society around them. Students will be able to comprehend how the cultural, political, and economic environment are changing with the emergence of new media and digital technologies. Students will be able to encounter, understand, and speak pressing contemporary controversies around new media (e.g., privacy, copyright, labor, expertise). Students will be able to develop a voice on these issues, in relevant new media formats.", "courseNumber": "3200", "professor": ["Brooke Duffy"], "description": "Media and culture are undergoing a series of transformations as new technologies, new forms of entertainment, new venues for political debate, and new models of public discourse emerge online. This course looks at how the social, political, and cultural landscape is changing in relation to digital media and information technologies. We develop critical resources to better understand the history of these new technologies and communicative forms, the economics behind them, the policies developing around them, and the sociocultural shifts from which they have emerged, and that they have helped provoke. We will aim to discard commonplace assumptions about these tools and phenomena, to ask deeper questions about their impact on society.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Data-Driven Web Applications", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3300", "professor": ["Jeff Rzeszotarski"], "description": "This course will introduce students to working with data in the context of modern web applications. These include data representation with relational and non-relational databases, data mining to find patterns and make predictions, and graphical presentation for visualization.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Personal Relationships and Technology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will be able to examine and extend basic principles of interpersonal communication to human behavior and relationships on the Internet. Students will be able to explore the nature and role of perception of self and others in computer-mediated interactions. Students will be able to investigate how interpersonal relationships are affected by information and communication technologies. Students will be able to form an awareness of research methods that are used to study social behavior on the Internet.", "courseNumber": "3400", "professor": ["Alexandra Hinck"], "description": "This course explores personal connections in the digital age, and how information and communication technologies impact our lives and relationships. It focuses on how people manage interactions and identities, develop and maintain relationships, accomplish social goals, create shared meanings, and engage in collaboration and conflict in social media. Emphasis will be placed on how current thinking in relational communication can explain and anticipate interpersonal dynamics on the Internet, but also on how online behaviors may challenge traditional principles of human communication. A major part of the course is a semester-long research project in which students working in small groups design, run, and present their own empirical study of personal relationships and technology.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Computing Cultures", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3561", "professor": ["Malte Ziewitz"], "description": "Computers are powerful tools for working, playing, thinking, and living. Laptops, PDAs, webcams, cell phones, and iPods are not just devices, they also provide narratives, metaphors, and ways of seeing the world. This course critically examines how computing technology and society shape each other and how this plays out in our everyday lives. Identifies how computers, networks, and information technologies reproduce, reinforce, and rework existing cultural trends, norms, and values. Looks at the values embodied in the cultures of computing and considers alternative ways to imagine, build, and work with information technologies.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Health and Computation", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4130", "professor": ["Tanzeem Choudhury"], "description": "The marriage of widely deployed sensing technology, machine learning techniques, and user interfaces will transform healthcare. Individuals' will be able to continuously keep track of their health and well-being by using novel sensors and computational tools. Healthcare professionals will exploit wearable and home sensors to diagnose medical conditions and deliver better care at much lower costs. Novel interfaces will deliver just-in-time intervention in users' natural environment and motivate positive behavior change throughout users lifespan. This course offers students an introduction to the computational, behavioral, and psychological concepts needed to develop the next generation of computing systems that can assess health and provide care. This project-based course will enable students to apply concepts learned towards original research.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Topics in Computer Game Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4152", "professor": ["Walker White"], "description": "Project-based follow-up course to INFO 3152. Students work in a multidisciplinary team to develop a game that incorporates innovative game mechanics. Advanced topics include nontraditional input schemes, advanced storytelling, social gameplay, and \"serious\" games.\u00a0 There is a special emphasis on developing games that can be submitted to festivals and competitions, or that can be commercialized. Students may take this course as either a programmer or a designer; the prerequisites differ depending upon the selected track. Contact the instructor for more information.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Networks II: Market Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4220", "professor": ["Arpita Ghosh"], "description": "Networks II builds on its prerequisite course and continues to examine how each of the computing, economic, sociological and natural worlds are connected and how the structure of these connections affects these worlds. In this course, we will construct mathematical models for and analyze networked settings, allowing us to both make predictions about behavior in such systems, as well as reason about how to design such systems to exhibit some desirable behavior. Throughout, we will draw on real-world examples such as social networks, peer-to-peer filesharing, Internet markets, and crowdsourcing, that illustrate these phenomena.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Language and Information", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4300", "professor": ["Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil"], "description": "How to make sense of the vast amounts of information available online, and how to relate it and to the social context in which it appears? This course introduces basic tools for retrieving and analyzing unstructured textual information from the web and social media. Applications include information retrieval (with human feedback),\u00a0sentiment analysis and social analysis of text. The coursework will include\u00a0programming projects that play on the interaction between knowledge and social factors.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Rapid Prototyping and Physical Computing", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4320", "professor": ["Cheng Zhang"], "description": "This class provides an introduction to modern rapid prototyping techniques such as laser cutting, 3D printing and microcontroller programming (such as the Arduino system). Using these tools, small multidisciplinary groups conduct the hardware project of their choice exploring topics as varied as: Universal Access, tangible interfaces, toys, personal or medical assistants and new musical instruments.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Human-Computer Interaction Design", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4400", "professor": ["Gilly Leshed"], "description": null, "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Human Robot Interaction - Research and Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4410", "professor": ["Malte Jung"], "description": "This course provides an introduction into the design of and research on human robot interaction. Students will be working alone and in teams on designing and examining novel ways for robots to interact with people. In parallel to the design projects students will be introduced to current research on human-robot interaction. Topics include: Needfinding, interaction analysis, video prototyping, testing, and systematic evaluation.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Human Computer Interaction Studio", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4420", "professor": ["Francois Guimbretiere"], "description": "This course will introduce User Experience design technique taught in a Studio. Students will work on a series of design studies and a semester long design project exploring advanced User Interaction design techniques. The course is designed to help students start a design portfolio to reflect their work. Students will be expected to buy small art supplies.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Computer-Mediated Communication", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4450", "professor": ["Susan Fussell"], "description": "Focuses on reading and evaluating the theories and research methodologies used to investigate communication via computer systems. Assignments include student collaborations using electronic conferencing and other advanced communication technologies, as well as reflections on and evaluations of these collaborations in light of current theories and research findings. Topics include virtual teams, videoconferencing, and others as they emerge.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Stars, Scores, and Rankings: Evaluation and Society", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4561", "professor": ["Malte Ziewitz"], "description": "Evaluation is a pervasive feature of contemporary life. Professors, doctors, countries, hotels, pollution, books, intelligence: there is hardly anything that is not subject to some form of review, rating, or ranking these days. This senior seminar examines the practices, cultures, and technologies of evaluation and asks how value is established, maintained, compared, subverted, resisted, and institutionalized in a range of different settings. Topics include user reviews, institutional audit, ranking and commensuration, algorithmic evaluation, tasting, gossip, and awards. Drawing on case studies from science, technology, culture, accounting, art, environment, and everyday life, we shall explore how evaluation comes to order our lives \u2013 and why it is so difficult to resist.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Independent Reading and Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4900", "professor": ["Erik Andersen"], "description": "Independent reading and research for undergraduates.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Teaching in Information Science", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4910", "professor": ["Erik Andersen"], "description": "Involves working as a teaching assistant in a course in the information science or information science, systems, and technology major.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Team Projects", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4998", "professor": ["Walker White"], "description": "Advanced independent work in information science as part of a student-led team project. Students must make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor. Students are expected to spend 3-4 hours per week per credit hour working on the project.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Visual Data Analytics for the Web", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Students will gain practical skills for building web pages though the introduction of the data mining algorithms and theoretical approaches to graphics. Students will build project management skills through group interactions. Develop analytical tools for understanding the complex programming skills needed to build complex data systems.", "courseNumber": "5100", "professor": ["Jeff Rzeszotarski"], "description": "This course will introduce students to working with data in the context of modern web applications. These include data representation with relational and non-relational databases, data mining to find patterns and make predictions, and graphical presentation for visualization.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Learning Analytics", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5200", "professor": ["Rene Kizilcec"], "description": null, "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Data Science in the Wild", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5304", "professor": ["Eran Toch"], "description": "Massive amounts of data are collected by many companies and organizations and the task of a data scientist is to extract actionable knowledge from the data \u2013 for scientific needs, to improve public health, to promote businesses, for social studies and for various other purposes. This course will focus on the practical aspects of the field and will attempt to provide a comprehensive set of tools for extracting knowledge from data.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "User Experience and User Research", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5305", "professor": ["Shiri Azenkot"], "description": "The course looks at several way of studying connective media, from different perspectives such as computer-mediated communication, theories from sociology and ethnographic methods. Through studying these theories, students learn how to approach their own research projects and how to study particular characteristics of online social media. Research projects will be done in pairs or groups of three and address targeted aspects of behavior around connective media, design the study on the theories and methods taught. From the course, students should be able to independently conduct an empirical study of social media characteristics in relation to both mobile, desktop and mixed media. The course will consist of essays, smaller assignments and a large research project. Lectures will be based on a set of relevant academic readings with discussion.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Human-Computer Interaction Research Seminar", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5328", "professor": ["Raymond Lutzky"], "description": "In this research seminar we will examine theoretical and empirical issues within the interdisciplinary area of human-computer interaction (HCI).", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Technology, Media, and Democracy", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5330", "professor": ["Mor Naaman"], "description": "This course brings together journalism, design, and technical disciplines to understand the various threats to journalism and media, and attempt to address these challenges using technical and computational methods and techniques. The free press, journalism and the media are some of the most critical elements of our democracy, but have been increasingly under attack by political and market forces. These challenges include: dwindling resources and support for deep investigative journalism; smear, law and technical and even physical assaults of media organizations and journalists; challenges to credibility and reliability including fake news and discrediting campaigns; and shifting business models and income sources that threaten both local and national news organizations and coverage. The course will include various elements that will help frame the problem and build/prototype solutions and will be deeply rooted in interactions with independent media organizations.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Behavioral Economics for Tech", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5350", "professor": ["Michael Sobolev"], "description": "Behavioral economics studies the effect of psychological, social, cognitive and emotional factors on humans decisions and behavior. This course will help students learn key concepts from behavioral economics and apply them in their daily lives, in the design of products, and in the research of human behavior. This course will explore the opportunities and challenges faced by researchers and practitioners when exploring the interplay between behavioral economics and technology.\u00a0", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Computer-Mediated Communication", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5450", "professor": ["Susan Fussell"], "description": "Focuses on reading and evaluating the theories and research methodologies used to investigate communication via computer systems. Assignments include student collaborations using electronic conferencing and other advanced communication technologies, as well as reflections on and evaluations of these collaborations in light of current theories and research findings.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Health Tech Clinical Practicum", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5500", "professor": ["Deborah Estrin"], "description": "This course is designed to give students hands on experience applying health tech tools and methods to real world clinical challenges. Students will work (individually or in pairs) with a clinical advisor to assess a particular clinical need for application of digital technology and based on that assessment students will develop a feasibility prototype.\u00a0 Through the implementation process, students will have the opportunity to shadow their clinical advisor in a clinical or research setting.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Health Tech, Data, and Systems", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5555", "professor": ["Deborah Estrin", "Daniel Stein"], "description": "This course is a survey of the computing systems, technologies, and data sets used throughout the healthcare system--spanning provider, patient, payer, and pharma. Students will gain an understanding of the functional requirements and constraints placed on these digital systems and to provide a basis for future innovation.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "MPS Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5900", "professor": ["Kyle Harms"], "description": "Independent research for Master of Professional Studies students.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "MPS Project Practicum", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5901", "professor": ["Kyle Harms"], "description": "As part of the Information Science MPS program, students engage in a semester-long team project for a client. The project involves about 10 hours of work per week for the duration of the semester. The list of projects changes from semester to semester, and includes clients as well as Cornell labs, faculty, and researchers.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Revolutionary Technologies", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5910", "professor": ["Tapan Parikh"], "description": "The goal of this course is to help students deepen their theoretical and historical perspective on social change and the relationship between social change and technology. We will read a range of revolutionary thinkers including, but not limited to, Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Antonio Gramsci, Stuart Hall, Mahatma Gandhi, E.F. Schumacher and Frantz Fanon. We will study their theories of revolution and the underlying tensions within the division of labor in society, and discuss the role that technology can play in forming and reforming these social relations. We will use this as a lens to reflect both upon existing technology and the underlying relations that create and sustain it, as well as to envision new technological possibilities supported by (and supporting) alternative forms of human organization. Coursework will consist of significant reading, regular reading reflections, design exercises and a final course project.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Computational Methods for Information Science Research", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6010", "professor": ["Paul Ginsparg"], "description": "Computation is an essential tool for many facets of information science research. Examples of its utility include capture, access and analysis of digital data; visualization of data for analysis, interpretation and information extraction; construction of user focused applications; and analysis of textual and sensor-derived information to detect patterns and dynamics of human activities, social interactions and social networks. Effective use of computation requires a mixture of skills including structuring data, accessing data, and programming, choosing and applying computational analysis methods, and designing visualizations. This course covers the mixture of these skills with the goal of providing INFOSCI graduate students with the appreciation of their utility and ability to employ them in future research. This course is project-based, allowing students to understand the use of computational methods.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Health and Computation", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6130", "professor": ["Tanzeem Choudhury"], "description": "The marriage of widely deployed sensing technology, machine learning techniques, and user interfaces will transform healthcare. Individuals' will be able to continuously keep track of their health and well-being by using novel sensors and computational tools. Healthcare professionals will exploit wearable and home sensors to diagnose medical conditions and deliver better care at much lower costs. Novel interfaces will deliver just-in-time intervention in users' natural environment and motivate positive behavior change throughout users lifespan. This course offers students an introduction to the computational, behavioral, and psychological concepts needed to develop the next generation of computing systems that can assess health and provide care. This project-based course will enable students to apply concepts learned towards original research.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Networks II: Market Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6220", "professor": ["Arpita Ghosh"], "description": "Networks II builds on its prerequisite course and continues to examine how each of the computing, economic, sociological and natural worlds are connected and how the structure of these connections affects these worlds. In this course, we will construct mathematical models for and analyze networked settings, allowing us to both make predictions about behavior in such systems, as well as reason about how to design such systems to exhibit some desirable behavior. Throughout, we will draw on real-world examples such as social networks, peer-to-peer filesharing, Internet markets, and crowdsourcing, that illustrate these phenomena.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Language Technologies", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6300", "professor": ["Claire Cardie"], "description": "Graduate-level introduction to technologies for the computational treatment of information in human-language form, covering modern natural-language processing (NLP) and/or information retrieval (IR). Possible topics include latent semantic analysis (LSI), clickthrough data for web search, language modeling, text categorization and clustering, information extraction, computational syntactic and semantic formalisms, grammar induction, and machine translation.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Educational Technology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6360", "professor": ["Erik Andersen"], "description": "An introduction to research in educational technology \u2013 an interdisciplinary field that draws from human-computer interaction, design, artificial intelligence, and video games. Potential topics include learning science, instructional scaffolding, knowledge representations, diagnosis of misconceptions, adaptation, intelligent tutoring systems, Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), games for learning, automation, user studies, data analysis, and large-scale experimentation. Combines lectures, group activities, paper reading, and a semester-long team project. Particular emphasis is placed on the design, implementation, and release of research artifacts that achieve real-world impact.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Human Robot Interaction - Research and Design", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6420", "professor": ["Malte Jung"], "description": "This course provides an introduction into the design of and research on human robot interaction. Students will be working alone and in teams on designing and examining novel ways for robots to interact with people. In parallel to the design projects students will be introduced to current research on human-robot interaction. Topics include: Needfinding, interaction analysis, video prototyping, testing, and systematic evaluation.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Computer-Mediated Communication", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6450", "professor": ["Susan Fussell"], "description": "Focuses on reading and evaluating the theories and research methodologies used to investigate communication via computer systems. Assignments include student collaborations using electronic conferencing and other advanced communication technologies, as well as reflections on and evaluations of these collaborations in light of current theories and research findings. Topics include virtual teams, videoconferencing, and others as they emerge.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Digital Technology Practicum", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6480", "professor": ["Jamie Hintlian", "Shawn Mankad"], "description": "This course immerses students in the theory and corporate practices relevant to a career in technology and information science. It is designed for students seeking to start their careers in technology, analytics, product management, or consultancy. The instruction is not industry-specific: the lessons from this course will be applicable to a wide range of industries, including high-tech, accounting, marketing, among others, and also to organizations from small startups, through nonprofits, to established industry giants.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Human Computer Interaction Graduate Studio", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6520", "professor": ["Francois Guimbretiere"], "description": null, "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Technology for Underserved Communities", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6600", "professor": ["Nicki Dell"], "description": null, "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Revolutions of the Mind: Media, Technology and Epistemological Change", "offered": "Spring (offered alternate, odd-numbered years only).", "outcomes": " Students will be able to reflect on their own epistemology (what they think counts as knowledge, good evidence, and good decisions/actions). Students will be able to identify how others think about knowledge and information, and will work through examples of how contexts, decisions, and actions influence thought. Students will be able to critically evaluate theories of epistemology, noting that both the theories themselves, and the practice of how people make sense of (and use) information are socio-culturally influenced. Students will generate examples of the dynamic, mutual impact of educational, technological, connective and entertainment media on 'how we think.' Students will be able to identify ethical issues of equal access to information, and will understand that differential access to information and different epistemological perspectives have an impact on society. Specifically, students will examine connective and social media's influence on thought and sociality (social engagement/disengagement, education, prosocial behavior, etc.) Students will engage in ongoing dialogue and group leadership in the seminar and write a proposal and final paper for the course", "courseNumber": "6710", "professor": ["Dawn Schrader"], "description": "Revolution: a change in organizational structure or power balance; turn-around; modification of an existing constitution. Current technologies and media are revolutionizing the way we think, what we know, and what we do. This course examines what it means to \"think about knowledge differently\" and \"change your mind\" by looking at the dynamic interaction between how people and society transform and are transformed by various forms of information and new media technologies. Examples from education (e.g., MOOCs), entertainment, virtual reality, and connective media contextualize this investigation into epistemological development, thought and action, and ethics of change. (graduate students; advanced undergraduates with permission)", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Information Science", "offered": "Fall or Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6940", "professor": ["Wendy Ju"], "description": "Study of topics not currently covered in INFO offerings, as determined by faculty and student interest.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Digital Life Research Seminar", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7060", "professor": ["Helen Nissenbaum"], "description": "This seminar focuses on the societal perspectives on digital technology. Speakers will come from a range of disciplines including computer science, data science, engineering, OR, humanities, social sciences, law, and policy and will present work in progress that considers ethical and political questions related to the design, development, and deployment of digital, computational, and information systems and devices. Topics include accountable algorithms, bias in machine learning, AI and the workplace, privacy, and cybersecurity.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "IS Colloquium", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7090", "professor": [], "description": "For staff, visitors, and graduate students interested in information science.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Independent Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7900", "professor": [], "description": "Independent research for M.Eng. students and pre-A exam Ph.D. Students.", "subject": "INFO"}, {"courseTitle": "Thesis Research", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "9900", "professor": [], "description": "Thesis research for post-A exam Ph.D. Students.", "subject": "INFO"}], "AEP": [{"courseTitle": "Introduction to Nanoscience and Nanoengineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": " An introductory understanding of quantum mechanics and optics as applied to nanoscience and nanotechnology. Acquired a basic understanding of the tools and fabrication techniques used in nanoscience and nanotechnology.", "courseNumber": "1200", "professor": ["Guillaume Lambert"], "description": "Lecture/laboratory course designed to introduce first-year students to some of the ideas and concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology. Topics include nanoscience and nanotechnology-what they are and why they are of interest; atoms and molecules; the solid state; surfaces; behavior of light and material particles when confined to nanoscale dimensions; scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) design; basic micromachining and chemical synthesis methods, i.e., \"top-down\" and \"bottom-up\" approaches to nanofabrication; how to manipulate structures on the nanoscale; physical laws and limits they place on the nanoworld; some far-out ideas. In the laboratory, students use an AFM to record atomic resolution images, use a MEMS computer-aided design software package to model the entire manufacturing sequence of a simple MEMS device, examine the simulated behavior of the device and compare it with real behavior, construct a simple STM and learn through hands on experience the basic workings of the device.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Physics II: Electricity and Magnetism", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2170", "professor": ["Michael Niemack"], "description": "Second in a three semester introductory physics sequence. Explores quantitative modeling of the physical world through a study of electricity and magnetism. More mathematical and abstract than a typical introductory electricity and magnetism course. Topics include electrostatics, behavior of matter in electric fields, circuits, magnetic fields, Faraday's law, AC circuits, and electromagnetic waves. Makes substantial use of vector calculus. At the level of Electricity and Magnetism by Purcell.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "The Physics of Life", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " An introductory-level understanding of molecular biology. An understanding of the importance of basic physics, math and chemistry concepts to molecular biology. An understanding of the importance of physics/math/engineering in developing techniques to probe biological systems.", "courseNumber": "2520", "professor": ["Harold Craighead"], "description": "Introduces the physics of biological macromolecules (e.g., proteins, DNA, RNA) to students of the physical sciences or engineering who have little or no background in biology. The macromolecules are studied from three perspectives. First, the biological role or function of each class of macromolecules is considered. Second, a quantitative description of the physical interactions that determine the behavior ofthese systems is provided. Finally, techniques that are commonly used to probe these systems, with an emphasis on current research, are discussed.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Interfacing the Digital Domain with an Analog World", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": " Learn techniques for interfacing computers with engineering and scientific measurements. Extend programming skills to using I/O operations in C++, graphical programming, and \"virtual instrument\" concepts. Improve technical writing skills in various forms, progress reports, technical reports and rapid, brief communications.", "courseNumber": "2640", "professor": ["Jie Shan"], "description": "Students use a computer to control equipment and acquire measurements in an engineering or scientific laboratory. Topics include data types, analog-to-digital conversion, digital-to-analog conversion, digital in/out, counter/timers, serial communication protocols, error analysis, least-squared fitting, introductory Fourier analysis, electrical waveguides/transmission lines, stepper motors, and introductory optical microscopy. Laboratory activities include practice exercises, measurement of pulse reflections in a transmission line, and development of a laser scanning microscope system. Data analysis is performed primarily using MatLabTM and instrument interfacing is primarily using LabVIEWTM, but also C++. Students develop effective written communication skills in the context of science and engineering. They prepare progress reports, technical reports, and formal articles based on laboratory work.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Introductory Mathematical Physics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3200", "professor": ["Lena Kourkoutis"], "description": "Covers review of vector analysis, tensor calculus, Dirac Delta functions, complex variable theory, Cauchy-Rieman conditions, complex Taylor and Laurent series, Cauchy integral formula and residue techniques, conformal mapping, calculus of variations, Fourier Series.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Intermediate Electromagnetism", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3550", "professor": ["Chris Xu"], "description": "Intermediate-level course on electromagnetic theory with a focus on statics. Vector calculus, electrostatics, conductors, dielectric materials, boundary conditions, solutions to Laplace's equation, and magnetostatics. Emphasis is on developing proficiency with analytical techniques and intuitive understanding of fundamental electromagnetism.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Intermediate Quantum Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3620", "professor": ["Frank Wise"], "description": "Continuation of AEP 3610\u00a0covering more advanced material in quantum mechanics. Topics include operator formalism and matrix representation, angular momentum and spin, the hydrogen atom, techniques for solving Schrodinger's equation including perturbation theory, two- and three-level systems, interaction with radiation, and identical particles.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Electronic Circuits", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3630", "professor": ["Earl Kirkland"], "description": "Practical electronics as encountered in a scientific or engineering research/development environment. Analyze, design, build, and test circuits using discrete components and integrated circuits. Analog circuits: resistors, capacitors, operational amplifiers, feedback amplifiers, oscillators, comparators, passive and active filters, diodes, and transistor switches and amplifiers. Digital circuits: combinational and sequential logic (gates, flipflops, registers, counters, timers), analog to digital (ADC) and digital to analog (DAC) conversion, signal averaging, and computer architecture and interfacing. Additional topics may include analog and digital signal processing, light wave communications, transducers, noise reduction techniques, and computer-aided circuit design. At the level of Art of Electronics by Horowitz and Hill.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Mathematical Physics II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4220", "professor": ["Bruce Kusse"], "description": "Topics include partial differential equations, Bessel functions, spherical harmonics, separation of variables, wave and diffusion equations, Laplace, Helmholtz, and Poisson's Equations, transform techniques, Green's functions; integral equations, Fredholm equations, kernals; complex variables, theory, branch points and cuts, Riemann sheets, method of steepest descent; tensors, contravariant, and covariant representations; group theory, matrix representations, class and character.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Fluid and Continuum Mechanics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4340", "professor": ["Lisa Wickham"], "description": "Intro to elasticity (including stress and strain tensors and their linear relations for isotropic materials), intro to plastic deformation with a focus on dislocations, fluid properties and some hydrostatics, conservation laws with applications (including pipes), dimensional analysis, vorticity, ideal flow (including forms of Bernoulli equations, potential flow, and conformal mapping), flow past objects (including boundary layers, drag, lift, and aerofoils), instabilities, an introduction to turbulence, compressible flow (including choking and shock waves).", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Quantum and Nonlinear Optics", "offered": "Spring (not offered every year).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4400", "professor": ["Jeffrey Moses"], "description": "Introduction to the fundamentals of the interaction of laser light with matter and to optical devices based on these processes. Topics include the propagation of laser beams in bulk media and guided-wave structures, the origins of optical nonlinearities, harmonic generation, parametric amplification, selffocusing, optical switching, propagation of ultrashort pulses, solitons, four-wave mixing, optical phase conjugation, optical resonance and two-level atoms, atom cooling and trapping, multiphoton processes, spontaneous and simulated scattering, and ultra-intense laser-matter interactions.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Controlled Fusion: Principles and Technology", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Understand the scientific basis for controlled fusion by both magnetic confinement and inertial confinement approaches, as well as the technological requirements for practical electric power generation by the controlled fusion process. Be able determine the energy release of any nuclear reaction or reaction chain using the mass-energy relationship, and be able to solve well-posed engineering problems in plasma physics as applied to controlled fusion using Maxwell's equations and the equations of motion of charged particles in electric and magnetic fields. Be able to solve well-posed engineering problems in energy generation by controlled fusion having to do with the properties of materials in the presence of neutron irradiation and other relevant processes. Understand the fundamental role played by energy in our society and in the developing world, the potential role fusion can play, and the reasons that it is potentially more attractive than fission-based electric power generation. Be able to determine the state-of-the-art of different aspects of fusion reactor design by independent study using books, journals, conference proceedings, reports on the web and personal communication with experts.", "courseNumber": "4840", "professor": ["David Hammer"], "description": "Introduction to the physical principles and various engineering aspects underlying power generation by controlled fusion. Topics include fuels and conditions required for fusion power and basic fusion-reactor concepts; fundamental aspects of plasma physics relevant to fusion plasmas and basic engineering problems for a fusion reactor; and an engineering analysis of proposed magnetic and/or inertial confinement fusion-reactor designs.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Independent Study in Engineering Physics", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4900", "professor": [], "description": "Laboratory or theoretical work in any branch of engineering physics under the direction of a member of the faculty. The study can take a number of forms; for example, design of laboratory apparatus, performance of laboratory measurements, computer simulation or software developments, theoretical design and analysis. Details TBA with respective faculty member.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Independent Study for Honors", "offered": "Multi-semester course (Fall, Spring).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4910", "professor": [], "description": "Laboratory or theoretical work in any branch of engineering physics under the direction of a member of the faculty. The study can take a number of forms; for example, design of laboratory appartus, performance of laboratory measurements, computer simulation or software developments, theoretical design and analysis. A written and oral report will be required for completing the honors project and a grade of A- or better.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Applied Solid State: Introduction to Materials Physics", "offered": "Spring (not offered every year).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5510", "professor": ["Craig Fennie"], "description": "Course focuses on understanding the role of chemistry and crystal structure in determining dielectric, electronic and magnetic properties of complex oxides. Topics potentially include: Crystal structure &amp; applied group theory; Transition metal ions in crystals; Laymen's guide to 2nd quantization; Models of the electronic structure &amp; Mott insulators; magnetic exchange interactions &amp; Goodenough-Kanamori-Anderson rules; Cooperative Jahn-Teller. Roughly first 3/4 of semester will be traditional lectures, while last 1/4 will be student-lead lectures on recent literature. The goal of the former is to prepare students for the latter.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Nanocharacterization", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6610", "professor": ["David Muller"], "description": "Graduate-level introduction to the tools used to image and probe optical, electronic, chemical, and mechanical properties at the nanoscale and below.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "M.Eng. Project", "offered": "Multi-semester course (Fall, Spring).", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7510", "professor": ["Joel Brock"], "description": "Independent study under the direction of a member of the university faculty. Students participate in an independent research project through work on a special problem related to their field of interest. A formal and complete research report is required.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Topics in Applied Physics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "7540", "professor": ["Joel Brock"], "description": "Special topics in applied science, with focus on areas of applied physics and engineering that are of current interest. Subjects chosen are researched in the library and presented in a seminar format by the students. Effort is made to integrate the subjects within selected subject areas such as atomic, biological, computational, optical, plasma, and solid-state physics, or microfabrication technology, as suggested by the students and coordinated by the instructor.", "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8020", "professor": ["Robert Buhrman"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8030", "professor": ["Gregory Fuchs"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8050", "professor": ["Craig Fennie"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8070", "professor": ["Bruce Kusse"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8090", "professor": ["Richard Lovelace"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8130", "professor": ["Jeffrey Moses"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8150", "professor": ["Frank Wise"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8160", "professor": ["Harold Craighead"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8170", "professor": ["Joel Brock"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8180", "professor": ["Guillaume Lambert"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8200", "professor": ["Gennady Shvets"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8210", "professor": ["Lois Pollack"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8220", "professor": ["David Muller"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8230", "professor": ["Chris Xu"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}, {"courseTitle": "Graduate Thesis", "offered": null, "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8240", "professor": ["Lena Kourkoutis"], "description": null, "subject": "AEP"}], "MSE": [{"courseTitle": "Atomic and Molecular Structure of Matter", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2060", "professor": ["Richard Robinson"], "description": "This course covers the atomic and molecular structure of crystalline and noncrystalline materials as well as selected analytical techniques for structural interrogation. Selected topics include, basic elements of structure; order and disorder; crystals; semicrystalline materials; amorphous materials; molecular materials; x-ray diffraction; small angle x-ray scattering.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Electronic Materials for the Information Age", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2620", "professor": ["R. Van Dover"], "description": "Examines the electrical and optical properties of materials. Topics include the mechanism of electrical conduction in metals, semiconductors and insulators; tuning of electrical properties in semiconductors, charge transport across metal/semiconductor and semiconductor/semiconductor junctions, and the interaction of materials with light; semiconductor electronic devices; and the materials science of device fabrication. Applications in microelectronics, solar cells, electronics, and display technologies are discussed.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Projects in Materials Science and Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2900", "professor": [], "description": "This course is intended for an individual student, or small group of students, to pursue a particular project, analytical investigation, or experimental investigation outside of regular courses. The course may also be used for formal or informal instruction supplementing regular courses in the major. Students taking the course must obtain approval from an MSE field member who will be responsible for supervising and evaluating the project work.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Research Involvement IIB", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "2920", "professor": [], "description": "Supervised independent research project in association with faculty members and faculty research groups of the department. Students design experiments, set up the necessary equipment, and evaluate the results. Creativity and synthesis are emphasized. Each semester may be taken as a continuation of a previous project or as a one-semester affiliation with a research group.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Kinetics, Diffusion, and Phase Transformations", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3040", "professor": ["Jin Suntivich"], "description": "Phenomenological and atomistic theories of diffusion in metals, alloys, ionic compounds, semiconductors and polymers. Introduction to general transport theory and non-equilibrium thermodynamics. Kinetic effects in solidification and solid state transformations that determine structure and properties of materials including: interfaces and microstructure; nucleation, growth and coarsening; alloy solidification; and diffusional and diffusionless transformations in solids.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Electronic, Magnetic, and Dielectric Properties of Materials", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3050", "professor": ["Christopher Umbach"], "description": "Examines the electronic, magnetic, and dielectric properties of materials, including an understanding of the atomic level interactions that give rise to these properties. Topics include: use of tensors to describe equilibrium and transport macroscopic physical properties; connection between symmetry and properties; ferroelectrics, ferromagnets, and multiferroics; dispersion relations of phonons and electrons in solids; and effects of defects. Applications in microelectronics are discussed.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Materials Design Concepts I", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3070", "professor": ["Christopher Umbach"], "description": "Introduces design in the context of real-world materials challenges as explored through reverse engineering. Students examine the materials, design, and cost constraints of a variety of technological products and the solutions commercially implemented. Analytical methods for materials testing and characterization are also introduced as part of the evaluation process.\u00a0 Students work in groups to develop a research plan, characterize materials, and report results.\u00a0 Exercises to develop technical writing and oral presentation skills are integrated throughout the course.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Junior Laboratory II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3120", "professor": ["Lisa Thompson"], "description": "Practical laboratory covering the characterization of material, analysis of data, and proper presentation of results. Labs are based on materials from courses in kinetics, diffusion and phase transformations (MSE 3040) and electronic, magnetic and dielectric properties (MSE 3050). Experiments include spectroscopic determination of a diffusion constants, thin film growth kinetics, anisotropic resistivity in polycrystalline materials, and characterization of magnetic properties. Data analysis is extended to include experimental design, use of custom model equations, and precision measurement techniques. Includes also continued development of technical writing skills.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Projects in Materials Science and Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3900", "professor": ["Huili Xing"], "description": "This course is intended for an individual student, or small group of students, to pursue a particular project, analytical investigation, or experimental investigation outside of regular courses. The course may also be used for formal or informal instruction supplementing regular courses in the major. Students taking the course must obtain approval from an MSE field member who will be responsible for supervising and evaluating the project work. Course may normally be used only as an advisor approved elective within the MSE curriculum.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Research Involvement IIIb", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "3920", "professor": ["Christopher Umbach"], "description": "Supervised independent research project in association with faculty members and faculty research groups of the department. Students design experiments, set up the necessary equipment, and evaluate the results. Creativity and synthesis are emphasized. Each semester may be taken as a continuation of a previous project or as a one-semester affiliation with a research group.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Senior Experimental Thesis II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4060", "professor": ["Carl Poitras"], "description": "Second semester of two-semester senior thesis sequence. See MSE 4050\u00a0for thesis project requirements. Continued research in individual faculty groups with periodic oral and written updates. In class discussion of communication strategies and development of presentation skills. Final thesis will be presented in a formal conference style with (i) oral presentation, (ii) poster session and (iii) conference manuscript. Completion of both 4050\u00a0and 4060 required to satisfy senior laboratory requirement for graduation, and is required for graduation with honors.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Materials Design Concepts II", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4070", "professor": ["Marty Murtagh"], "description": "Introduces materials design in the context of real-world materials design projects carried out in industry. In the first portion of the course, the process of engineering design is studied in light of economic, environmental, regulatory, and safety issues. Patent searching and communication skills are addressed. In the second portion, speakers from industry lecture on case studies of materials design problems. Students give oral presentations and write technical reports based on case studies.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Biomedical Materials and Their Applications", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4610", "professor": ["Lara Estroff"], "description": "Many types of materials are used in biomedical engineering to replace or supplement natural biological systems. Interaction with blood and tissues is always of primary importance, but depending on the use of the biomedical material, mechanical, optical, and transport properties may also be vital. The first half of the class will focus on establishing a common vocabulary and knowledge base in materials, biochemistry, cell biology, and immunology. The second half of the class will focus on a survey of commercially available biomaterials as well as future prospects.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Projects in Materials Science and Engineering", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4900", "professor": [], "description": "This course is intended for an individual student, or small group of students, to pursue a particular project, analytical investigation, or experimental investigation outside of regular courses. The course may also be used for formal or informal instruction supplementing regular courses in the major. Students taking the course must obtain approval from an MSE field member who will be responsible for supervising and evaluating the project work. Course may normally be used only as an advisor approved elective within the MSE curriculum.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Research Involvement IVb", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4920", "professor": [], "description": "Supervised independent research project in association with faculty members and faculty research groups of the department. Students design experiments, set up the necessary equipment, and evaluate the results. Creativity and synthesis are emphasized. Each semester may be taken as a continuation of a previous project or as a one-semester affiliation with a research group. May be continuation or a one-semester affiliation with a research group.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Undergraduate Teaching Involvement", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "4950", "professor": ["Huili Xing"], "description": "Gives credit to students who help in the laboratory portions of select MSE courses. The number of credits earned is determined by the teaching load and is typically 1-3.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Special Project", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5010", "professor": [], "description": "Master of Engineering research project.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Mechanical Properties of Thin Films", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5120", "professor": ["Shefford Baker"], "description": "Relationships between microstructure and mechanical behavior in thin films and other nanoscale structures. Topics include stresses, elastic and plastic deformation, creep and anelasticity, and fracture and delamination; and how mechanical behavior at the nanoscale deviates from the predictions of scaling laws derived for bulk materials. Applications in microelectronics, optics, microelectromechanical systems, coatings, etc.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Structures and Materials for Sustainable Energy Systems", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5150", "professor": ["Petru Petrina"], "description": "Design of sustainable energy systems is a critical challenge that must be addressed in the near future. This course will focus on the analysis, design and production of renewable energy (solar, wind, nuclear, hydro, and geothermal, etc.) systems, with a focus on understanding the critical material challenges as well as the design and manufacturing challenges of sustainable energy systems. Target audience is advanced undergraduate and M.Eng students who wish to gain a solid foundation in sustainable energy systems, including energy conversion and utilization technologies for both residential and industrial applications.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Ceramics", "offered": "Fall.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5310", "professor": ["Chekesha Watson"], "description": "Covers ceramic processes and products, structure of ceramic crystals, structure of glasses, structural defects (point defects, dislocations), surfaces, interfaces and grain boundaries, diffusion in ionic materials (atomistic and phenomenological approach, relationships between diffusion and point defect structure), ceramic phase diagrams, phase transformations. Emphasizes physicochemical aspects of the different topics.\u00a0", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Nanofabrication and Characterization of Electronics", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5410", "professor": ["Huili Xing"], "description": "This course will give an introduction to modern nanofabrication technologies with emphasis on integrated circuits manufacturing. Thermal budget, scaling of geometry, pitch and registry and control of parametric yield will be used for integration guidelines. Physical principles and process modeling will be covered in lectures and labs will include a series of fabrication steps of lithography, metallization, plasma etching and annealing to produce semiconductor devices (Schottky diodes, pn junction diodes, MOS capacitors, and MOSFETs). Recent advances in nanofabrication will be briefly reviewed for their possible technology insertion and main integration challenges.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Nanofabrication and Characterization of Electronics Laboratory", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5411", "professor": ["Huili Xing"], "description": "This course provides an introduction to nanofabrication technologies with emphasis on Si-based integrated circuits manufacturing as well as modern electronics based on GaN, 2D materials etc. The lab, primarily taught in the Cornell Teaching Cleanroom, includes basic fabrication steps of lithography, metallization, plasma etching and annealing. A series of devices will be fabricated: solar cells, MOS capacitors and transistors, 2D transistors, GaN HEMTs and LEDs.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Computational Materials Science", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5720", "professor": ["Nicole Benedek"], "description": "An introduction to state-of-the-art computational methods in materials research with an emphasis on the atomic-scale and hands-on modeling using supercomputers. The course will focus primarily on firstprinciples quantum mechanical techniques (Density Functional Theory) for modeling extended (periodic) materials and properties, including electronic structure, vibrational properties, surfaces and interfaces, phase transformations and kinetics. Covers approaches to modeling a wide range of materials, including metals, ceramics and semiconductors.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Kinetics, Diffusion, and Phase Transformation", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5840", "professor": ["Jin Suntivich"], "description": "Phenomenological and atomistic theories of diffusion in metals, alloys, ionic compounds, semiconductors and polymers. Introduction to general transport theory and non-equilibrium thermodynamics. Kinetic effects in solidification and solid state transformations that determine structure and properties of materials including: interfaces and microstructure; nucleation, growth and coarsening; alloy solidification; and diffusional and diffusionless transformations in solids.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Electronic, Magnetic, and Dielectric Properties of Materials", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5850", "professor": ["Christopher Umbach"], "description": "Examines the electronic, magnetic, and dielectric properties of materials, including an understanding of the atomic level interactions that give rise to these properties. Topics include: use of tensors to describe equilibrium and transport macroscopic physical properties; connection between symmetry and properties; ferroelectrics, ferromagnets, and multiferroics; dispersion relations of phonons and electrons in solids; and effects of defects. Applications in microelectronics are discussed.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Atomic and Molecular Structure of Matter", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5860", "professor": ["Richard Robinson"], "description": "This course covers the atomic and molecular structure of crystalline and noncrystalline materials as well as selected analytical techniques for structural interrogation.\u00a0 Selected topics include, basic elements of structure; order and disorder; crystals; semicrystalline materials; amorphous materials; molectular materials; x-ray diffraction; small angle x-ray scattering.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Introduction to Electronic Materials", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "5862", "professor": ["R. Van Dover"], "description": "Examines the electrical and optical properties of materials. Topics include the mechanism of electrical conduction in metals, semiconductors and insulators; tuning of electrical properties in semiconductors, charge transport across metal/semiconductor and semiconductor/semiconductor junctions, and the interaction of materials with light; semiconductor electronic devices; and the materials science of device fabrication. Applications in microelectronics, solar cells, electronics, and display technologies are discussed. Students will complete and present a review of a current issues in semiconductor device evolution.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Chemistry of Materials", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6010", "professor": ["Uli Wiesner"], "description": "Chemistry of materials with an emphasis on concepts of general applicability and modern developments in the materials field. The transition from atoms to molecules is developed by applying group theoretical approaches to chemical bonding, from molecules to materials by applying thermodynamic principles to self-assembly, and then to underpin these transitions with examples from the chemistry of low dimensional nanomaterials, sol-gel derived materials, surfactant and block copolymer self-assembly, mesoporous solids, and hierarchical materials. Throughout the course, examples from the current literature are discussed to familiarize students with the state-of-the-art in the field.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Physics of Semiconductors and Nanostructures", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": " Learn basic principles of solid state and semiconductor physics needed to understand modern electronic and photonic devices. Learn how engineering materials and structures at the nanoscale enables novel electronic and photonic properties for a wide variety of engineering applications. Learn the relationship between basic science and engineering applications.", "courseNumber": "6050", "professor": ["Debdeep Jena"], "description": "Covers basic solid state and semiconductor physics relevant for understanding electronic and optical devices. Topics include crystalline structures, bonding in atoms and solids, energy bands in solids, electron statistics and dynamics in energy bands, effective mass equation, carrier transport in solids, Boltzmann transport equation, semiconductor homo- and hetero-junctions, optical processes in semiconductors, electronic and optical properties of semiconductor nanostructures, semiconductor quantum wells, wires, and dots, electron transport in reduced dimensions, semiconductor lasers and optoelectronics, high-frequency response of electrons in solids and plasmons.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced Composite Materials", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6550", "professor": ["Stuart Phoenix"], "description": "Topics center around micromechanical and statistical (reliability) aspects of the strength and fatigue of fibrous composites. Topics include Hedgepeth shear-lag models of stress transfer around arrays of fiber breaks; statistical theories of composite failure to forecast reliability; stress distributions around holes and cuts in composite laminates; and compressive strength of composites.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Advanced X-ray Characterization", "offered": "Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "6720", "professor": ["Andrej Singer"], "description": "Graduate-level introduction to coherent x-ray scattering and imaging in the context of nanoscale phenomena in metals, ceramics, polymers, and composites. The course focuses on in-situ x-ray characterization of functional materials through using the ability of novel x-ray sources to generate laser-like x-ray beams. Novel sources include recently build or upgraded x-ray synchrotrons (e.g., CHESS), table-top soft x-ray lasers, and x-ray free-electron lasers. Specific topics include coherence of x-ray beams, coherent x-ray imaging, x-ray cross correlation spectroscopy, resonant x-ray diffraction, in-situ x-ray characterization, ultrafast x-ray measurements, and the overview of existing x-ray sources and x-ray focusing techniques.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Research in Materials Science", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8000", "professor": [], "description": "Independent research in materials science under the guidance of a member of the staff.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Materials Science and Engineering Colloquium", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8010", "professor": ["Lara Estroff"], "description": "Lectures by visiting scientists, Cornell staff members, and graduate students on subjects of interest in materials sciences, especially in connection with new research.", "subject": "MSE"}, {"courseTitle": "Materials Science Research Seminars", "offered": "Fall, Spring.", "outcomes": null, "courseNumber": "8020", "professor": [], "description": "Short presentations on research in progress by students and staff.", "subject": "MSE"}]}